
                   TITLE II--ROLE OF PUBLIC PROGRAMS
                Subtitle A--Improved Access to Medicaid

SEC. 2001. MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR THE LOWEST INCOME POPULATIONS.

    (a) Coverage for Individuals With Income at or Below 133 Percent of the Poverty Line.--
        (1) Beginning 2014.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended--
            (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause (VI);
            (B) by adding ``or'' at the end of subclause (VII); and
            (C) by inserting after subclause (VII) the following:

                    ``(VIII) beginning January 1, 2014, who are under 65 years of age, not pregnant, not entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits under part A of title XVIII, or enrolled for benefits under part B of title XVIII, and are not described in a previous subclause of this clause, and whose income (as determined under subsection (e)(14)) does not exceed 133 percent of the poverty line (as defined in section 2110(c)(5)) applicable to a family of the size involved, subject to subsection (k);''.

        (2) Provision of at least minimum essential coverage.--
            (A) In general.--Section 1902 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended by inserting after subsection (j) the following:
    ``(k)(1) The medical assistance provided to an individual described in subclause (VIII) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) shall consist of benchmark coverage described in section 1937(b)(1) or benchmark equivalent coverage described in section 1937(b)(2). Such medical assistance shall be provided subject to the requirements of section 1937, without regard to whether a State otherwise has elected the option to provide medical assistance through coverage under that section, unless an individual described in subclause (VIII) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) is also an individual for whom, under subparagraph (B) of section 1937(a)(2), the State may not require enrollment in benchmark coverage described in subsection (b)(1) of section 1937 or benchmark equivalent coverage described in subsection (b)(2) of that section.''.
            (B) Conforming amendment.--Section 1903(i) of the Social Security Act, as amended by section 6402(c), is amended--
                (i) in paragraph (24), by striking ``or'' at the end;
                (ii) in paragraph (25), by striking the period and inserting ``; or''; and
                (iii) by adding at the end the following:
        ``(26) with respect to any amounts expended for medical assistance for individuals described in subclause (VIII) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(i) other than medical assistance provided through benchmark coverage described in section 1937(b)(1) or benchmark equivalent coverage described in section 1937(b)(2).''.
        (3) Federal funding for cost of covering newly eligible individuals.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), is amended--
            (A) in subsection (b), in the first sentence, by inserting ``subsection (y) and'' before ``section 1933(d)''; and
            (B) by adding at the end the following new subsection:``(y) Increased FMAP for Medical Assistance for Newly Eligible Mandatory Individuals.--
        ``(1) Amount of increase.--
            ``(A) 100 percent fmap.--During the period that begins on January 1, 2014, and ends on December 31, 2016, notwithstanding subsection (b), the Federal medical assistance percentage determined for a State that is one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia for each fiscal year occurring during that period with respect to amounts expended for medical assistance for newly eligible individuals described in subclause (VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) shall be equal to 100 percent.
            ``(B) 2017 and 2018.--
                ``(i) In general.--During the period that begins on January 1, 2017, and ends on December 31, 2018, notwithstanding subsection (b) and subject to subparagraph (D), the Federal medical assistance percentage determined for a State that is one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia for each fiscal year occurring during that period with respect to amounts expended for medical assistance for newly eligible individuals described in subclause (VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), shall be increased by the applicable percentage point increase specified in clause (ii) for the quarter and the State.
                ``(ii) Applicable percentage point increase.--
                    ``(I) In general.--For purposes of clause (i), the applicable percentage point increase for a quarter is the following:
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            If the State is an    If the State is not an
 ``For any fiscal year     expansion State, the    expansion State, the
  quarter occurring in    applicable percentage    applicable percentage
   the calendar year:       point increase is:      point increase is:
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2017                     30.3                     34.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------
2018                     31.3                     33.3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

                    ``(II) Expansion state defined.--For purposes of 
                the table in subclause (I), a State is an expansion 
                State if, on the date of the enactment of the Patient 
                Protection and Affordable Care Act, the State offers 
                health benefits coverage statewide to parents and 
                nonpregnant, childless adults whose income is at least 
                100 percent of the poverty line, that is not dependent 
                on access to employer coverage, employer contribution, 
                or employment and is not limited to premium assistance, 
                hospital-only benefits, a high deductible health plan, 
                or alternative benefits under a demonstration program 
                authorized under section 1938. A State that offers 
                health benefits coverage to only parents or only 
                nonpregnant childless adults described in the preceding 
                sentence shall not be considered to be an expansion 
                State.

            ``(C) 2019 and succeeding years.--Beginning January 1, 
        2019, notwithstanding subsection (b) but subject to 
        subparagraph (D), the Federal medical assistance percentage 
        determined for a State that is one of the 50 States or the 
        District of Columbia for each fiscal year quarter occurring 
        during that period with respect to amounts expended for medical 
        assistance for newly eligible individuals described in 
        subclause (VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), shall be 
        increased by 32.3 percentage points.
            ``(D) Limitation.--The Federal medical assistance 
        percentage determined for a State under subparagraph (B) or (C) 
        shall in no case be more than 95 percent.
        ``(2) Definitions.--In this subsection:
            ``(A) Newly eligible.--The term `newly eligible' means, 
        with respect to an individual described in subclause (VIII) of 
        section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), an individual who is not under 19 
        years of age (or such higher age as the State may have elected) 
        and who, on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
        Affordable Care Act, is not eligible under the State plan or 
        under a waiver of the plan for full benefits or for benchmark 
        coverage described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 
        1937(b)(1) or benchmark equivalent coverage described in 
        section 1937(b)(2) that has an aggregate actuarial value that 
        is at least actuarially equivalent to benchmark coverage 
        described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 
        1937(b)(1), or is eligible but not enrolled (or is on a waiting 
        list) for such benefits or coverage through a waiver under the 
        plan that has a capped or limited enrollment that is full.
            ``(B) Full benefits.--The term `full benefits' means, with 
        respect to an individual, medical assistance for all services 
        covered under the State plan under this title that is not less 
        in amount, duration, or scope, or is determined by the 
        Secretary to be substantially equivalent, to the medical 
        assistance available for an individual described in section 
        1902(a)(10)(A)(i).''.
        (4) State options to offer coverage earlier and presumptive 
    eligibility; children required to have coverage for parents to be 
    eligible.--
            (A) In general.--Subsection (k) of section 1902 of the 
        Social Security Act (as added by paragraph (2)), is amended by 
        inserting after paragraph (1) the following:
    ``(2) Beginning with the first day of any fiscal year quarter that 
begins on or after January 1, 2011, and before January 1, 2014, a State 
may elect through a State plan amendment to provide medical assistance 
to individuals who would be described in subclause (VIII) of subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(i) if that subclause were effective before January 1, 2014. 
A State may elect to phase-in the extension of eligibility for medical 
assistance to such individuals based on income, so long as the State 
does not extend such eligibility to individuals described in such 
subclause with higher income before making individuals described in 
such subclause with lower income eligible for medical assistance.
    ``(3) If an individual described in subclause (VIII) of subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(i) is the parent of a child who is under 19 years of age (or 
such higher age as the State may have elected) who is eligible for 
medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of such plan 
(under that subclause or under a State plan amendment under paragraph 
(2), the individual may not be enrolled under the State plan unless the 
individual's child is enrolled under the State plan or under a waiver 
of the plan or is enrolled in other health insurance coverage. For 
purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `parent' includes an 
individual treated as a caretaker relative for purposes of carrying out 
section 1931.''.
            (B) Presumptive eligibility.--Section 1920 of the Social 
        Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1) is amended by adding at the 
        end the following:
    ``(e) If the State has elected the option to provide a presumptive 
eligibility period under this section or section 1920A, the State may 
elect to provide a presumptive eligibility period (as defined in 
subsection (b)(1)) for individuals who are eligible for medical 
assistance under clause (i)(VIII) of subsection (a)(10)(A) or section 
1931 in the same manner as the State provides for such a period under 
this section or section 1920A, subject to such guidance as the 
Secretary shall establish.''.
        (5) Conforming amendments.--
            (A) Section 1902(a)(10) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1396a(a)(10)) is amended in the matter following subparagraph 
        (G), by striking ``and (XIV)'' and inserting ``(XIV)'' and by 
        inserting ``and (XV) the medical assistance made available to 
        an individual described in subparagraph (A)(i)(VIII) shall be 
        limited to medical assistance described in subsection (k)(1)'' 
        before the semicolon.
            (B) Section 1902(l)(2)(C) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1396a(l)(2)(C)) is amended by striking ``100'' and inserting 
        ``133''.
            (C) Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is 
        amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
                (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (xii);
                (ii) by inserting ``or'' at the end of clause (xiii); 
            and
                (iii) by inserting after clause (xiii) the following:
        ``(xiv) individuals described in section 
    1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII),''.
            (D) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)) 
        is amended by inserting ``1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII),'' after 
        ``1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VII),''.
            (E) Section 1937(a)(1)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-
        7(a)(1)(B)) is amended by inserting ``subclause (VIII) of 
        section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) or under'' after ``eligible under''.
    (b) Maintenance of Medicaid Income Eligibility.--Section 1902 of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended--
        (1) in subsection (a)--
            (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (72);
            (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (73) and 
        inserting ``; and''; and
            (C) by inserting after paragraph (73) the following new 
        paragraph:
        ``(74) provide for maintenance of effort under the State plan 
    or under any waiver of the plan in accordance with subsection 
    (gg).''; and
        (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(gg) Maintenance of Effort.--
        ``(1) General requirement to maintain eligibility standards 
    until state exchange is fully operational.--Subject to the 
    succeeding paragraphs of this subsection, during the period that 
    begins on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
    Affordable Care Act and ends on the date on which the Secretary 
    determines that an Exchange established by the State under section 
    1311 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is fully 
    operational, as a condition for receiving any Federal payments 
    under section 1903(a) for calendar quarters occurring during such 
    period, a State shall not have in effect eligibility standards, 
    methodologies, or procedures under the State plan under this title 
    or under any waiver of such plan that is in effect during that 
    period, that are more restrictive than the eligibility standards, 
    methodologies, or procedures, respectively, under the plan or 
    waiver that are in effect on the date of enactment of the Patient 
    Protection and Affordable Care Act.
        ``(2) Continuation of eligibility standards for children until 
    october 1, 2019.--The requirement under paragraph (1) shall 
    continue to apply to a State through September 30, 2019, with 
    respect to the eligibility standards, methodologies, and procedures 
    under the State plan under this title or under any waiver of such 
    plan that are applicable to determining the eligibility for medical 
    assistance of any child who is under 19 years of age (or such 
    higher age as the State may have elected).
        ``(3) Nonapplication.--During the period that begins on January 
    1, 2011, and ends on December 31, 2013, the requirement under 
    paragraph (1) shall not apply to a State with respect to 
    nonpregnant, nondisabled adults who are eligible for medical 
    assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan at 
    the option of the State and whose income exceeds 133 percent of the 
    poverty line (as defined in section 2110(c)(5)) applicable to a 
    family of the size involved if, on or after December 31, 2010, the 
    State certifies to the Secretary that, with respect to the State 
    fiscal year during which the certification is made, the State has a 
    budget deficit, or with respect to the succeeding State fiscal 
    year, the State is projected to have a budget deficit. Upon 
    submission of such a certification to the Secretary, the 
    requirement under paragraph (1) shall not apply to the State with 
    respect to any remaining portion of the period described in the 
    preceding sentence.
        ``(4) Determination of compliance.--
            ``(A) States shall apply modified gross income.--A State's 
        determination of income in accordance with subsection (e)(14) 
        shall not be considered to be eligibility standards, 
        methodologies, or procedures that are more restrictive than the 
        standards, methodologies, or procedures in effect under the 
        State plan or under a waiver of the plan on the date of 
        enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act for 
        purposes of determining compliance with the requirements of 
        paragraph (1), (2), or (3).
            ``(B) States may expand eligibility or move waivered 
        populations into coverage under the state plan.--With respect 
        to any period applicable under paragraph (1), (2), or (3), a 
        State that applies eligibility standards, methodologies, or 
        procedures under the State plan under this title or under any 
        waiver of the plan that are less restrictive than the 
        eligibility standards, methodologies, or procedures, applied 
        under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan on the date 
        of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 
        or that makes individuals who, on such date of enactment, are 
        eligible for medical assistance under a waiver of the State 
        plan, after such date of enactment eligible for medical 
        assistance through a State plan amendment with an income 
        eligibility level that is not less than the income eligibility 
        level that applied under the waiver, or as a result of the 
        application of subclause (VIII) of section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i), 
        shall not be considered to have in effect eligibility 
        standards, methodologies, or procedures that are more 
        restrictive than the standards, methodologies, or procedures in 
        effect under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan on 
        the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
        Care Act for purposes of determining compliance with the 
        requirements of paragraph (1), (2), or (3).''.
    (c) Medicaid Benchmark Benefits Must Consist of at Least Minimum 
Essential Coverage.--Section 1937(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-7(b)) 
is amended--
        (1) in paragraph (1), in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), 
    by inserting ``subject to paragraphs (5) and (6),'' before 
    ``each'';
        (2) in paragraph (2)--
            (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by inserting 
        ``subject to paragraphs (5) and (6)'' after ``subsection 
        (a)(1),'';
            (B) in subparagraph (A)--
                (i) by redesignating clauses (iv) and (v) as clauses 
            (vi) and (vii), respectively; and
                (ii) by inserting after clause (iii), the following:
                ``(iv) Coverage of prescription drugs.
                ``(v) Mental health services.''; and
            (C) in subparagraph (C)--
                (i) by striking clauses (i) and (ii); and
                (ii) by redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as clauses 
            (i) and (ii), respectively; and
        (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
        ``(5) Minimum standards.--Effective January 1, 2014, any 
    benchmark benefit package under paragraph (1) or benchmark 
    equivalent coverage under paragraph (2) must provide at least 
    essential health benefits as described in section 1302(b) of the 
    Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
        ``(6) Mental health services parity.--
            ``(A) In general.--In the case of any benchmark benefit 
        package under paragraph (1) or benchmark equivalent coverage 
        under paragraph (2) that is offered by an entity that is not a 
        medicaid managed care organization and that provides both 
        medical and surgical benefits and mental health or substance 
        use disorder benefits, the entity shall ensure that the 
        financial requirements and treatment limitations applicable to 
        such mental health or substance use disorder benefits comply 
        with the requirements of section 2705(a) of the Public Health 
        Service Act in the same manner as such requirements apply to a 
        group health plan.
            ``(B) Deemed compliance.--Coverage provided with respect to 
        an individual described in section 1905(a)(4)(B) and covered 
        under the State plan under section 1902(a)(10)(A) of the 
        services described in section 1905(a)(4)(B) (relating to early 
        and periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment services 
        defined in section 1905(r)) and provided in accordance with 
        section 1902(a)(43), shall be deemed to satisfy the 
        requirements of subparagraph (A).''.
    (d) Annual Reports on Medicaid Enrollment.--
        (1) State reports.--Section 1902(a) of the Social Security Act 
    (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)), as amended by subsection (b), is amended--
            (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (73);
            (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (74) and 
        inserting ``; and''; and
            (C) by inserting after paragraph (74) the following new 
        paragraph:
        ``(75) provide that, beginning January 2015, and annually 
    thereafter, the State shall submit a report to the Secretary that 
    contains--
            ``(A) the total number of enrolled and newly enrolled 
        individuals in the State plan or under a waiver of the plan for 
        the fiscal year ending on September 30 of the preceding 
        calendar year, disaggregated by population, including children, 
        parents, nonpregnant childless adults, disabled individuals, 
        elderly individuals, and such other categories or sub-
        categories of individuals eligible for medical assistance under 
        the State plan or under a waiver of the plan as the Secretary 
        may require;
            ``(B) a description, which may be specified by population, 
        of the outreach and enrollment processes used by the State 
        during such fiscal year; and
            ``(C) any other data reporting determined necessary by the 
        Secretary to monitor enrollment and retention of individuals 
        eligible for medical assistance under the State plan or under a 
        waiver of the plan.''.
        (2) Reports to congress.--Beginning April 2015, and annually 
    thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit 
    a report to the appropriate committees of Congress on the total 
    enrollment and new enrollment in Medicaid for the fiscal year 
    ending on September 30 of the preceding calendar year on a national 
    and State-by-State basis, and shall include in each such report 
    such recommendations for administrative or legislative changes to 
    improve enrollment in the Medicaid program as the Secretary 
    determines appropriate.
    (e) State Option for Coverage for Individuals With Income That 
Exceeds 133 Percent of the Poverty Line.--
        (1) Coverage as optional categorically needy group.--Section 
    1902 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a) is amended--
            (A) in subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)--
                (i) in subclause (XVIII), by striking ``or'' at the 
            end;
                (ii) in subclause (XIX), by adding ``or'' at the end; 
            and
                (iii) by adding at the end the following new subclause:

                    ``(XX) beginning January 1, 2014, who are under 65 
                years of age and are not described in or enrolled under 
                a previous subclause of this clause, and whose income 
                (as determined under subsection (e)(14)) exceeds 133 
                percent of the poverty line (as defined in section 
                2110(c)(5)) applicable to a family of the size involved 
                but does not exceed the highest income eligibility 
                level established under the State plan or under a 
                waiver of the plan, subject to subsection (hh);'' and

            (B) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(hh)(1) A State may elect to phase-in the extension of 
eligibility for medical assistance to individuals described in 
subclause (XX) of subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii) based on the categorical 
group (including nonpregnant childless adults) or income, so long as 
the State does not extend such eligibility to individuals described in 
such subclause with higher income before making individuals described 
in such subclause with lower income eligible for medical assistance.
    ``(2) If an individual described in subclause (XX) of subsection 
(a)(10)(A)(ii) is the parent of a child who is under 19 years of age 
(or such higher age as the State may have elected) who is eligible for 
medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of such plan, 
the individual may not be enrolled under the State plan unless the 
individual's child is enrolled under the State plan or under a waiver 
of the plan or is enrolled in other health insurance coverage. For 
purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `parent' includes an 
individual treated as a caretaker relative for purposes of carrying out 
section 1931.''.
        (2) Conforming amendments.--
            (A) Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)), as 
        amended by subsection (a)(5)(C), is amended in the matter 
        preceding paragraph (1)--
                (i) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (xiii);
                (ii) by inserting ``or'' at the end of clause (xiv); 
            and
                (iii) by inserting after clause (xiv) the following:
        ``(xv) individuals described in section 
    1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX),''.
            (B) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)) 
        is amended by inserting ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX),'' after 
        ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XIX),''.
            (C) Section 1920(e) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1(e)), as 
        added by subsection (a)(4)(B), is amended by inserting ``or 
        clause (ii)(XX)'' after ``clause (i)(VIII)''.

SEC. 2002. INCOME ELIGIBILITY FOR NONELDERLY DETERMINED USING MODIFIED 
              GROSS INCOME.

    (a) In General.--Section 1902(e) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
        ``(14) Income determined using modified gross income.--
            ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (r) or any 
        other provision of this title, except as provided in 
        subparagraph (D), for purposes of determining income 
        eligibility for medical assistance under the State plan or 
        under any waiver of such plan and for any other purpose 
        applicable under the plan or waiver for which a determination 
        of income is required, including with respect to the imposition 
        of premiums and cost-sharing, a State shall use the modified 
        gross income of an individual and, in the case of an individual 
        in a family greater than 1, the household income of such 
        family. A State shall establish income eligibility thresholds 
        for populations to be eligible for medical assistance under the 
        State plan or a waiver of the plan using modified gross income 
        and household income that are not less than the effective 
        income eligibility levels that applied under the State plan or 
        waiver on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
        Affordable Care Act. For purposes of complying with the 
        maintenance of effort requirements under subsection (gg) during 
        the transition to modified gross income and household income, a 
        State shall, working with the Secretary, establish an 
        equivalent income test that ensures individuals eligible for 
        medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of 
        the plan on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
        Affordable Care Act, do not lose coverage under the State plan 
        or under a waiver of the plan. The Secretary may waive such 
        provisions of this title and title XXI as are necessary to 
        ensure that States establish income and eligibility 
        determination systems that protect beneficiaries.
            ``(B) No income or expense disregards.--No type of expense, 
        block, or other income disregard shall be applied by a State to 
        determine income eligibility for medical assistance under the 
        State plan or under any waiver of such plan or for any other 
        purpose applicable under the plan or waiver for which a 
        determination of income is required.
            ``(C) No assets test.--A State shall not apply any assets 
        or resources test for purposes of determining eligibility for 
        medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of 
        the plan.
            ``(D) Exceptions.--
                ``(i) Individuals eligible because of other aid or 
            assistance, elderly individuals, medically needy 
            individuals, and individuals eligible for medicare cost-
            sharing.--Subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) shall not apply 
            to the determination of eligibility under the State plan or 
            under a waiver for medical assistance for the following:

                    ``(I) Individuals who are eligible for medical 
                assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of 
                the plan on a basis that does not require a 
                determination of income by the State agency 
                administering the State plan or waiver, including as a 
                result of eligibility for, or receipt of, other Federal 
                or State aid or assistance, individuals who are 
                eligible on the basis of receiving (or being treated as 
                if receiving) supplemental security income benefits 
                under title XVI, and individuals who are eligible as a 
                result of being or being deemed to be a child in foster 
                care under the responsibility of the State.
                    ``(II) Individuals who have attained age 65.
                    ``(III) Individuals who qualify for medical 
                assistance under the State plan or under any waiver of 
                such plan on the basis of being blind or disabled (or 
                being treated as being blind or disabled) without 
                regard to whether the individual is eligible for 
                supplemental security income benefits under title XVI 
                on the basis of being blind or disabled and including 
                an individual who is eligible for medical assistance on 
                the basis of section 1902(e)(3).
                    ``(IV) Individuals described in subsection 
                (a)(10)(C).
                    ``(V) Individuals described in any clause of 
                subsection (a)(10)(E).

                ``(ii) Express lane agency findings.--In the case of a 
            State that elects the Express Lane option under paragraph 
            (13), notwithstanding subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), the 
            State may rely on a finding made by an Express Lane agency 
            in accordance with that paragraph relating to the income of 
            an individual for purposes of determining the individual's 
            eligibility for medical assistance under the State plan or 
            under a waiver of the plan.
                ``(iii) Medicare prescription drug subsidies 
            determinations.--Subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) shall not 
            apply to any determinations of eligibility for premium and 
            cost-sharing subsidies under and in accordance with section 
            1860D-14 made by the State pursuant to section 1935(a)(2).
                ``(iv) Long-term care.--Subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) 
            shall not apply to any determinations of eligibility of 
            individuals for purposes of medical assistance for nursing 
            facility services, a level of care in any institution 
            equivalent to that of nursing facility services, home or 
            community-based services furnished under a waiver or State 
            plan amendment under section 1915 or a waiver under section 
            1115, and services described in section 1917(c)(1)(C)(ii).
                ``(v) Grandfather of current enrollees until date of 
            next regular redetermination.--An individual who, on 
            January 1, 2014, is enrolled in the State plan or under a 
            waiver of the plan and who would be determined ineligible 
            for medical assistance solely because of the application of 
            the modified gross income or household income standard 
            described in subparagraph (A), shall remain eligible for 
            medical assistance under the State plan or waiver (and 
            subject to the same premiums and cost-sharing as applied to 
            the individual on that date) through March 31, 2014, or the 
            date on which the individual's next regularly scheduled 
            redetermination of eligibility is to occur, whichever is 
            later.
            ``(E) Transition planning and oversight.--Each State shall 
        submit to the Secretary for the Secretary's approval the income 
        eligibility thresholds proposed to be established using 
        modified gross income and household income, the methodologies 
        and procedures to be used to determine income eligibility using 
        modified gross income and household income and, if applicable, 
        a State plan amendment establishing an optional eligibility 
        category under subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX). To the extent 
        practicable, the State shall use the same methodologies and 
        procedures for purposes of making such determinations as the 
        State used on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection 
        and Affordable Care Act. The Secretary shall ensure that the 
        income eligibility thresholds proposed to be established using 
        modified gross income and household income, including under the 
        eligibility category established under subsection 
        (a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX), and the methodologies and procedures 
        proposed to be used to determine income eligibility, will not 
        result in children who would have been eligible for medical 
        assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan 
        on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
        Affordable Care Act no longer being eligible for such 
        assistance.
            ``(F) Limitation on secretarial authority.--The Secretary 
        shall not waive compliance with the requirements of this 
        paragraph except to the extent necessary to permit a State to 
        coordinate eligibility requirements for dual eligible 
        individuals (as defined in section 1915(h)(2)(B)) under the 
        State plan or under a waiver of the plan and under title XVIII 
        and individuals who require the level of care provided in a 
        hospital, a nursing facility, or an intermediate care facility 
        for the mentally retarded.
            ``(G) Definitions of modified gross income and household 
        income.--In this paragraph, the terms `modified gross income' 
        and `household income' have the meanings given such terms in 
        section 36B(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
            ``(H) Continued application of medicaid rules regarding 
        point-in-time income and sources of income.--The requirement 
        under this paragraph for States to use modified gross income 
        and household income to determine income eligibility for 
        medical assistance under the State plan or under any waiver of 
        such plan and for any other purpose applicable under the plan 
        or waiver for which a determination of income is required shall 
        not be construed as affecting or limiting the application of--
                ``(i) the requirement under this title and under the 
            State plan or a waiver of the plan to determine an 
            individual's income as of the point in time at which an 
            application for medical assistance under the State plan or 
            a waiver of the plan is processed; or
                ``(ii) any rules established under this title or under 
            the State plan or a waiver of the plan regarding sources of 
            countable income.''.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1902(a)(17) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(a)(17)) is amended by inserting ``(e)(14),'' before 
``(l)(3)''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) 
take effect on January 1, 2014.

SEC. 2003. REQUIREMENT TO OFFER PREMIUM ASSISTANCE FOR EMPLOYER-
              SPONSORED INSURANCE.

    (a) In General.--Section 1906A of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396e-1) is 
amended--
        (1) in subsection (a)--
            (A) by striking ``may elect to'' and inserting ``shall'';
            (B) by striking ``under age 19''; and
            (C) by inserting ``, in the case of an individual under age 
        19,'' after ``(and'';
        (2) in subsection (c), in the first sentence, by striking 
    ``under age 19''; and
        (3) in subsection (d)--
            (A) in paragraph (2)--
                (i) in the first sentence, by striking ``under age 
            19''; and
                (ii) by striking the third sentence and inserting ``A 
            State may not require, as a condition of an individual (or 
            the individual's parent) being or remaining eligible for 
            medical assistance under this title, that the individual 
            (or the individual's parent) apply for enrollment in 
            qualified employer-sponsored coverage under this 
            section.''; and
            (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``the parent of an 
        individual under age 19'' and inserting ``an individual (or the 
        parent of an individual)''; and
        (4) in subsection (e), by striking ``under age 19'' each place 
    it appears.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--The heading for section 1906A of such 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396e-1) is amended by striking ``option for children''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on January 1, 2014.

SEC. 2004. MEDICAID COVERAGE FOR FORMER FOSTER CARE CHILDREN.

    (a) In General.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a), as amended by section 2001(a)(1), is amended--
        (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subclause (VII);
        (2) by adding ``or'' at the end of subclause (VIII); and
        (3) by inserting after subclause (VIII) the following:

                    ``(IX) who were in foster care under the 
                responsibility of a State for more than 6 months 
                (whether or not consecutive) but are no longer in such 
                care, who are not described in any of subclauses (I) 
                through (VII) of this clause, and who are under 25 
                years of age;''.

    (b) Option To Provide Presumptive Eligibility.--Section 1920(e) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-1(e)), as added by section 2001(a)(4)(B) and 
amended by section 2001(e)(2)(C), is amended by inserting ``, clause 
(i)(IX),'' after ``clause (i)(VIII)''.
    (c) Conforming Amendments.--
        (1) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)), as 
    amended by section 2001(a)(5)(D), is amended by inserting 
    ``1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX),'' after ``1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(VIII),''.
        (2) Section 1937(a)(2)(B)(viii) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-
    7(a)(2)(B)(viii)) is amended by inserting ``, or the individual 
    qualifies for medical assistance on the basis of section 
    1902(a)(10)(A)(i)(IX)'' before the period.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on January 1, 2019.

SEC. 2005. PAYMENTS TO TERRITORIES.

    (a) Increase in Limit on Payments.--Section 1108(g) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1308(g)) is amended--
        (1) in paragraph (2), in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), 
    by striking ``paragraph (3)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (3) and 
    (5)'';
        (2) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and (3)'' and inserting 
    ``(3), and (4)''; and
        (3) by adding at the end the following paragraph:
        ``(5) Fiscal year 2011 and thereafter.--The amounts otherwise 
    determined under this subsection for Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
    Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa for 
    the second, third, and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2011, and for 
    each fiscal year after fiscal year 2011 (after the application of 
    subsection (f) and the preceding paragraphs of this subsection), 
    shall be increased by 30 percent.''.
    (b) Disregard of Payments for Mandatory Expanded Enrollment.--
Section 1108(g)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1308(g)(4)) is amended--
        (1) by striking ``to fiscal years beginning'' and inserting 
    ``to--
            ``(A) fiscal years beginning'';
        (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; 
    and
        (3) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(B) fiscal years beginning with fiscal year 2014, 
        payments made to Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, the 
        Northern Mariana Islands, or American Samoa with respect to 
        amounts expended for medical assistance for newly eligible (as 
        defined in section 1905(y)(2)) nonpregnant childless adults who 
        are eligible under subclause (VIII) of section 
        1902(a)(10)(A)(i) and whose income (as determined under section 
        1902(e)(14)) does not exceed (in the case of each such 
        commonwealth and territory respectively) the income eligibility 
        level in effect for that population under title XIX or under a 
        waiver on the date of enactment of the Patient Protection and 
        Affordable Care Act, shall not be taken into account in 
        applying subsection (f) (as increased in accordance with 
        paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (5) of this subsection) to such 
        commonwealth or territory for such fiscal year.''.
    (c) Increased FMAP.--
        (1) In general.--The first sentence of section 1905(b) of the 
    Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is amended by striking 
    ``shall be 50 per centum'' and inserting ``shall be 55 percent''.
        (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) takes 
    effect on January 1, 2011.

SEC. 2006. SPECIAL ADJUSTMENT TO FMAP DETERMINATION FOR CERTAIN STATES 
              RECOVERING FROM A MAJOR DISASTER.

    Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as 
amended by sections 2001(a)(3) and 2001(b)(2), is amended--
        (1) in subsection (b), in the first sentence, by striking 
    ``subsection (y)'' and inserting ``subsections (y) and (aa)''; and
        (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
    ``(aa)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (b), beginning January 1, 
2011, the Federal medical assistance percentage for a fiscal year for a 
disaster-recovery FMAP adjustment State shall be equal to the 
following:
        ``(A) In the case of the first fiscal year (or part of a fiscal 
    year) for which this subsection applies to the State, the Federal 
    medical assistance percentage determined for the fiscal year 
    without regard to this subsection and subsection (y), increased by 
    50 percent of the number of percentage points by which the Federal 
    medical assistance percentage determined for the State for the 
    fiscal year without regard to this subsection and subsection (y), 
    is less than the Federal medical assistance percentage determined 
    for the State for the preceding fiscal year after the application 
    of only subsection (a) of section 5001 of Public Law 111-5 (if 
    applicable to the preceding fiscal year) and without regard to this 
    subsection, subsection (y), and subsections (b) and (c) of section 
    5001 of Public Law 111-5.
        ``(B) In the case of the second or any succeeding fiscal year 
    for which this subsection applies to the State, the Federal medical 
    assistance percentage determined for the preceding fiscal year 
    under this subsection for the State, increased by 25 percent of the 
    number of percentage points by which the Federal medical assistance 
    percentage determined for the State for the fiscal year without 
    regard to this subsection and subsection (y), is less than the 
    Federal medical assistance percentage determined for the State for 
    the preceding fiscal year under this subsection.
    ``(2) In this subsection, the term `disaster-recovery FMAP 
adjustment State' means a State that is one of the 50 States or the 
District of Columbia, for which, at any time during the preceding 7 
fiscal years, the President has declared a major disaster under section 
401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act and determined as a result of such disaster that every county or 
parish in the State warrant individual and public assistance or public 
assistance from the Federal Government under such Act and for which--
        ``(A) in the case of the first fiscal year (or part of a fiscal 
    year) for which this subsection applies to the State, the Federal 
    medical assistance percentage determined for the State for the 
    fiscal year without regard to this subsection and subsection (y), 
    is less than the Federal medical assistance percentage determined 
    for the State for the preceding fiscal year after the application 
    of only subsection (a) of section 5001 of Public Law 111-5 (if 
    applicable to the preceding fiscal year) and without regard to this 
    subsection, subsection (y), and subsections (b) and (c) of section 
    5001 of Public Law 111-5, by at least 3 percentage points; and
        ``(B) in the case of the second or any succeeding fiscal year 
    for which this subsection applies to the State, the Federal medical 
    assistance percentage determined for the State for the fiscal year 
    without regard to this subsection and subsection (y), is less than 
    the Federal medical assistance percentage determined for the State 
    for the preceding fiscal year under this subsection by at least 3 
    percentage points.
    ``(3) The Federal medical assistance percentage determined for a 
disaster-recovery FMAP adjustment State under paragraph (1) shall apply 
for purposes of this title (other than with respect to disproportionate 
share hospital payments described in section 1923 and payments under 
this title that are based on the enhanced FMAP described in 2105(b)) 
and shall not apply with respect to payments under title IV (other than 
under part E of title IV) or payments under title XXI.''.

SEC. 2007. MEDICAID IMPROVEMENT FUND RESCISSION.

    (a) Rescission.--Any amounts available to the Medicaid Improvement 
Fund established under section 1941 of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396w-1) for any of fiscal years 2014 through 2018 that are 
available for expenditure from the Fund and that are not so obligated 
as of the date of the enactment of this Act are rescinded.
    (b) Conforming Amendments.--Section 1941(b)(1) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396w-1(b)(1)) is amended--
        (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``$100,000,000'' and 
    inserting ``$0''; and
        (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``$150,000,000'' and 
    inserting ``$0''.

   Subtitle B--Enhanced Support for the Children's Health Insurance 
                                Program

SEC. 2101. ADDITIONAL FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION FOR CHIP.

    (a) In General.--Section 2105(b) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397ee(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 
``Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, during the period that begins 
on October 1, 2013, and ends on September 30, 2019, the enhanced FMAP 
determined for a State for a fiscal year (or for any portion of a 
fiscal year occurring during such period) shall be increased by 23 
percentage points, but in no case shall exceed 100 percent. The 
increase in the enhanced FMAP under the preceding sentence shall not 
apply with respect to determining the payment to a State under 
subsection (a)(1) for expenditures described in subparagraph (D)(iv), 
paragraphs (8), (9), (11) of subsection (c), or clause (4) of the first 
sentence of section 1905(b).''.
    (b) Maintenance of Effort.--
        (1) In general.--Section 2105(d) of the Social Security Act (42 
    U.S.C. 1397ee(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
        ``(3) Continuation of eligibility standards for children until 
    october 1, 2019.--
            ``(A) In general.--During the period that begins on the 
        date of enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
        Act and ends on September 30, 2019, a State shall not have in 
        effect eligibility standards, methodologies, or procedures 
        under its State child health plan (including any waiver under 
        such plan) for children (including children provided medical 
        assistance for which payment is made under section 
        2105(a)(1)(A)) that are more restrictive than the eligibility 
        standards, methodologies, or procedures, respectively, under 
        such plan (or waiver) as in effect on the date of enactment of 
        that Act. The preceding sentence shall not be construed as 
        preventing a State during such period from--
                ``(i) applying eligibility standards, methodologies, or 
            procedures for children under the State child health plan 
            or under any waiver of the plan that are less restrictive 
            than the eligibility standards, methodologies, or 
            procedures, respectively, for children under the plan or 
            waiver that are in effect on the date of enactment of such 
            Act; or
                ``(ii) imposing a limitation described in section 
            2112(b)(7) for a fiscal year in order to limit expenditures 
            under the State child health plan to those for which 
            Federal financial participation is available under this 
            section for the fiscal year.
            ``(B) Assurance of exchange coverage for targeted low-
        income children unable to be provided child health assistance 
        as a result of funding shortfalls.--In the event that 
        allotments provided under section 2104 are insufficient to 
        provide coverage to all children who are eligible to be 
        targeted low-income children under the State child health plan 
        under this title, a State shall establish procedures to ensure 
        that such children are provided coverage through an Exchange 
        established by the State under section 1311 of the Patient 
        Protection and Affordable Care Act.''.
        (2) Conforming amendment to title xxi medicaid maintenance of 
    effort.--Section 2105(d)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
    1397ee(d)(1)) is amended by adding before the period ``, except as 
    required under section 1902(e)(14)''.
    (c) No Enrollment Bonus Payments for Children Enrolled After Fiscal 
Year 2013.--Section 2105(a)(3)(F)(iii) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397ee(a)(3)(F)(iii)) is amended by inserting ``or any children 
enrolled on or after October 1, 2013'' before the period.
    (d) Income Eligibility Determined Using Modified Gross Income.--
        (1) State plan requirement.--Section 2102(b)(1)(B) of the 
    Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397bb(b)(1)(B)) is amended--
            (A) in clause (iii), by striking ``and'' after the 
        semicolon;
            (B) in clause (iv), by striking the period and inserting 
        ``; and''; and
            (C) by adding at the end the following:
                ``(v) shall, beginning January 1, 2014, use modified 
            gross income and household income (as defined in section 
            36B(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) to 
            determine eligibility for child health assistance under the 
            State child health plan or under any waiver of such plan 
            and for any other purpose applicable under the plan or 
            waiver for which a determination of income is required, 
            including with respect to the imposition of premiums and 
            cost-sharing, consistent with section 1902(e)(14).''.
        (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 2107(e)(1) of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)) is amended--
            (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (L) as 
        subparagraphs (F) through (M), respectively; and
            (B) by inserting after subparagraph (D), the following:
            ``(E) Section 1902(e)(14) (relating to income determined 
        using modified gross income and household income).''.
    (e) Application of Streamlined Enrollment System.--Section 
2107(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397gg(e)(1)), as 
amended by subsection (d)(2), is amended by adding at the end the 
following:
            ``(N) Section 1943(b) (relating to coordination with State 
        Exchanges and the State Medicaid agency).''.
    (f) CHIP Eligibility for Children Ineligible for Medicaid as a 
Result of Elimination of Disregards.--Notwithstanding any other 
provision of law, a State shall treat any child who is determined to be 
ineligible for medical assistance under the State Medicaid plan or 
under a waiver of the plan as a result of the elimination of the 
application of an income disregard based on expense or type of income, 
as required under section 1902(e)(14) of the Social Security Act (as 
added by this Act), as a targeted low-income child under section 
2110(b) (unless the child is excluded under paragraph (2) of that 
section) and shall provide child health assistance to the child under 
the State child health plan (whether implemented under title XIX or 
XXI, or both, of the Social Security Act).

SEC. 2102. TECHNICAL CORRECTIONS.

    (a) CHIPRA.--Effective as if included in the enactment of the 
Children's Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 (Public 
Law 111-3) (in this section referred to as ``CHIPRA''):
        (1) Section 2104(m) of the Social Security Act, as added by 
    section 102 of CHIPRA, is amended--
            (A) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and
            (B) by inserting after paragraph (6), the following:
        ``(7) Adjustment of fiscal year 2010 allotments to account for 
    changes in projected spending for certain previously approved 
    expansion programs.--For purposes of recalculating the fiscal year 
    2010 allotment, in the case of one of the 50 States or the District 
    of Columbia that has an approved State plan amendment effective 
    January 1, 2006, to provide child health assistance through the 
    provision of benefits under the State plan under title XIX for 
    children from birth through age 5 whose family income does not 
    exceed 200 percent of the poverty line, the Secretary shall 
    increase the allotment by an amount that would be equal to the 
    Federal share of expenditures that would have been claimed at the 
    enhanced FMAP rate rather than the Federal medical assistance 
    percentage matching rate for such population.''.
        (2) Section 605 of CHIPRA is amended by striking ``legal 
    residents'' and insert ``lawfully residing in the United States''.
        (3) Subclauses (I) and (II) of paragraph (3)(C)(i) of section 
    2105(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397ee(a)(3)(ii)), as 
    added by section 104 of CHIPRA, are each amended by striking ``, 
    respectively''.
        (4) Section 2105(a)(3)(E)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 
    U.S.C. 1397ee(a)(3)(E)(ii)), as added by section 104 of CHIPRA, is 
    amended by striking subclause (IV).
        (5) Section 2105(c)(9)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
    1397e(c)(9)(B)), as added by section 211(c)(1) of CHIPRA, is 
    amended by striking ``section 1903(a)(3)(F)'' and inserting 
    ``section 1903(a)(3)(G)''.
        (6) Section 2109(b)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
    1397ii(b)(2)(B)), as added by section 602 of CHIPRA, is amended by 
    striking ``the child population growth factor under section 
    2104(m)(5)(B)'' and inserting ``a high-performing State under 
    section 2111(b)(3)(B)''.
        (7) Section 2110(c)(9)(B)(v) of the Social Security Act (42 
    U.S.C. 1397jj(c)(9)(B)(v)), as added by section 505(b) of CHIPRA, 
    is amended by striking ``school or school system'' and inserting 
    ``local educational agency (as defined under section 9101 of the 
    Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965''.
        (8) Section 211(a)(1)(B) of CHIPRA is amended--
            (A) by striking ``is amended'' and all that follows through 
        ``adding'' and inserting ``is amended by adding''; and
            (B) by redesignating the new subparagraph to be added by 
        such section to section 1903(a)(3) of the Social Security Act 
        as a new subparagraph (H).
    (b) ARRA.--Effective as if included in the enactment of section 
5006(a) of division B of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009 (Public Law 111-5), the second sentence of section 1916A(a)(1) of 
the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396o-1(a)(1)) is amended by 
striking ``or (i)'' and inserting ``, (i), or (j)''.

        Subtitle C--Medicaid and CHIP Enrollment Simplification

SEC. 2201. ENROLLMENT SIMPLIFICATION AND COORDINATION WITH STATE HEALTH 
              INSURANCE EXCHANGES.

    Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397aa et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 1943. ENROLLMENT SIMPLIFICATION AND COORDINATION WITH STATE 
              HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGES.

    ``(a) Condition for Participation in Medicaid.--As a condition of 
the State plan under this title and receipt of any Federal financial 
assistance under section 1903(a) for calendar quarters beginning after 
January 1, 2014, a State shall ensure that the requirements of 
subsection (b) is met.
    ``(b) Enrollment Simplification and Coordination With State Health 
Insurance Exchanges and Chip.--
        ``(1) In general.--A State shall establish procedures for--
            ``(A) enabling individuals, through an Internet website 
        that meets the requirements of paragraph (4), to apply for 
        medical assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of 
        the plan, to be enrolled in the State plan or waiver, to renew 
        their enrollment in the plan or waiver, and to consent to 
        enrollment or reenrollment in the State plan through electronic 
        signature;
            ``(B) enrolling, without any further determination by the 
        State and through such website, individuals who are identified 
        by an Exchange established by the State under section 1311 of 
        the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as being 
        eligible for--
                ``(i) medical assistance under the State plan or under 
            a waiver of the plan; or
                ``(ii) child health assistance under the State child 
            health plan under title XXI;
            ``(C) ensuring that individuals who apply for but are 
        determined to be ineligible for medical assistance under the 
        State plan or a waiver or ineligible for child health 
        assistance under the State child health plan under title XXI, 
        are screened for eligibility for enrollment in qualified health 
        plans offered through such an Exchange and, if applicable, 
        premium assistance for the purchase of a qualified health plan 
        under section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (and, if 
        applicable, advance payment of such assistance under section 
        1412 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act), and, 
        if eligible, enrolled in such a plan without having to submit 
        an additional or separate application, and that such 
        individuals receive information regarding reduced cost-sharing 
        for eligible individuals under section 1402 of the Patient 
        Protection and Affordable Care Act, and any other assistance or 
        subsidies available for coverage obtained through the Exchange;
            ``(D) ensuring that the State agency responsible for 
        administering the State plan under this title (in this section 
        referred to as the `State Medicaid agency'), the State agency 
        responsible for administering the State child health plan under 
        title XXI (in this section referred to as the `State CHIP 
        agency') and an Exchange established by the State under section 
        1311 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act utilize 
        a secure electronic interface sufficient to allow for a 
        determination of an individual's eligibility for such medical 
        assistance, child health assistance, or premium assistance, and 
        enrollment in the State plan under this title, title XXI, or a 
        qualified health plan, as appropriate;
            ``(E) coordinating, for individuals who are enrolled in the 
        State plan or under a waiver of the plan and who are also 
        enrolled in a qualified health plan offered through such an 
        Exchange, and for individuals who are enrolled in the State 
        child health plan under title XXI and who are also enrolled in 
        a qualified health plan, the provision of medical assistance or 
        child health assistance to such individuals with the coverage 
        provided under the qualified health plan in which they are 
        enrolled, including services described in section 1905(a)(4)(B) 
        (relating to early and periodic screening, diagnostic, and 
        treatment services defined in section 1905(r)) and provided in 
        accordance with the requirements of section 1902(a)(43); and
            ``(F) conducting outreach to and enrolling vulnerable and 
        underserved populations eligible for medical assistance under 
        this title XIX or for child health assistance under title XXI, 
        including children, unaccompanied homeless youth, children and 
        youth with special health care needs, pregnant women, racial 
        and ethnic minorities, rural populations, victims of abuse or 
        trauma, individuals with mental health or substance-related 
        disorders, and individuals with HIV/AIDS.
        ``(2) Agreements with state health insurance exchanges.--The 
    State Medicaid agency and the State CHIP agency may enter into an 
    agreement with an Exchange established by the State under section 
    1311 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act under which 
    the State Medicaid agency or State CHIP agency may determine 
    whether a State resident is eligible for premium assistance for the 
    purchase of a qualified health plan under section 36B of the 
    Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (and, if applicable, advance payment 
    of such assistance under section 1412 of the Patient Protection and 
    Affordable Care Act), so long as the agreement meets such 
    conditions and requirements as the Secretary of the Treasury may 
    prescribe to reduce administrative costs and the likelihood of 
    eligibility errors and disruptions in coverage.
        ``(3) Streamlined enrollment system.--The State Medicaid agency 
    and State CHIP agency shall participate in and comply with the 
    requirements for the system established under section 1413 of the 
    Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (relating to streamlined 
    procedures for enrollment through an Exchange, Medicaid, and CHIP).
        ``(4) Enrollment website requirements.--The procedures 
    established by State under paragraph (1) shall include establishing 
    and having in operation, not later than January 1, 2014, an 
    Internet website that is linked to any website of an Exchange 
    established by the State under section 1311 of the Patient 
    Protection and Affordable Care Act and to the State CHIP agency (if 
    different from the State Medicaid agency) and allows an individual 
    who is eligible for medical assistance under the State plan or 
    under a waiver of the plan and who is eligible to receive premium 
    credit assistance for the purchase of a qualified health plan under 
    section 36B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to compare the 
    benefits, premiums, and cost-sharing applicable to the individual 
    under the State plan or waiver with the benefits, premiums, and 
    cost-sharing available to the individual under a qualified health 
    plan offered through such an Exchange, including, in the case of a 
    child, the coverage that would be provided for the child through 
    the State plan or waiver with the coverage that would be provided 
    to the child through enrollment in family coverage under that plan 
    and as supplemental coverage by the State under the State plan or 
    waiver.
        ``(5) Continued need for assessment for home and community-
    based services.--Nothing in paragraph (1) shall limit or modify the 
    requirement that the State assess an individual for purposes of 
    providing home and community-based services under the State plan or 
    under any waiver of such plan for individuals described in 
    subsection (a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI).''.

SEC. 2202. PERMITTING HOSPITALS TO MAKE PRESUMPTIVE ELIGIBILITY 
              DETERMINATIONS FOR ALL MEDICAID ELIGIBLE POPULATIONS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1902(a)(47) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(a)(47)) is amended--
        (1) by striking ``at the option of the State, provide'' and 
    inserting ``provide--
            ``(A) at the option of the State,'';
        (2) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon; and
        (3) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(B) that any hospital that is a participating provider 
        under the State plan may elect to be a qualified entity for 
        purposes of determining, on the basis of preliminary 
        information, whether any individual is eligible for medical 
        assistance under the State plan or under a waiver of the plan 
        for purposes of providing the individual with medical 
        assistance during a presumptive eligibility period, in the same 
        manner, and subject to the same requirements, as apply to the 
        State options with respect to populations described in section 
        1920, 1920A, or 1920B (but without regard to whether the State 
        has elected to provide for a presumptive eligibility period 
        under any such sections), subject to such guidance as the 
        Secretary shall establish;''.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1903(u)(1)(D)(v) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396b(u)(1)(D)v)) is amended--
        (1) by striking ``or for'' and inserting ``for''; and
        (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: 
    ``, or for medical assistance provided to an individual during a 
    presumptive eligibility period resulting from a determination of 
    presumptive eligibility made by a hospital that elects under 
    section 1902(a)(47)(B) to be a qualified entity for such purpose''.
    (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on January 1, 2014, and apply to services furnished on or after 
that date.

             Subtitle D--Improvements to Medicaid Services

SEC. 2301. COVERAGE FOR FREESTANDING BIRTH CENTER SERVICES.

    (a) In General.--Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396d), is amended--
        (1) in subsection (a)--
            (A) in paragraph (27), by striking ``and'' at the end;
            (B) by redesignating paragraph (28) as paragraph (29); and
            (C) by inserting after paragraph (27) the following new 
        paragraph:
        ``(28) freestanding birth center services (as defined in 
    subsection (l)(3)(A)) and other ambulatory services that are 
    offered by a freestanding birth center (as defined in subsection 
    (l)(3)(B)) and that are otherwise included in the plan; and''; and
        (2) in subsection (l), by adding at the end the following new 
    paragraph:
    ``(3)(A) The term `freestanding birth center services' means 
services furnished to an individual at a freestanding birth center (as 
defined in subparagraph (B)) at such center.
    ``(B) The term `freestanding birth center' means a health 
facility--
        ``(i) that is not a hospital;
        ``(ii) where childbirth is planned to occur away from the 
    pregnant woman's residence;
        ``(iii) that is licensed or otherwise approved by the State to 
    provide prenatal labor and delivery or postpartum care and other 
    ambulatory services that are included in the plan; and
        ``(iv) that complies with such other requirements relating to 
    the health and safety of individuals furnished services by the 
    facility as the State shall establish.
    ``(C) A State shall provide separate payments to providers 
administering prenatal labor and delivery or postpartum care in a 
freestanding birth center (as defined in subparagraph (B)), such as 
nurse midwives and other providers of services such as birth attendants 
recognized under State law, as determined appropriate by the Secretary. 
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `birth attendant' 
means an individual who is recognized or registered by the State 
involved to provide health care at childbirth and who provides such 
care within the scope of practice under which the individual is legally 
authorized to perform such care under State law (or the State 
regulatory mechanism provided by State law), regardless of whether the 
individual is under the supervision of, or associated with, a physician 
or other health care provider. Nothing in this subparagraph shall be 
construed as changing State law requirements applicable to a birth 
attendant.''.
    (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)), is amended in the matter 
preceding clause (i) by striking ``and (21)'' and inserting ``, (21), 
and (28)''.
    (c) Effective Date.--
        (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
    amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of 
    the enactment of this Act and shall apply to services furnished on 
    or after such date.
        (2) Exception if state legislation required.--In the case of a 
    State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social 
    Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
    determines requires State legislation (other than legislation 
    appropriating funds) in order for the plan to meet the additional 
    requirement imposed by the amendments made by this section, the 
    State plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the 
    requirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure to 
    meet this additional requirement before the first day of the first 
    calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular 
    session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the 
    enactment of this Act. For purposes of the previous sentence, in 
    the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each 
    year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular 
    session of the State legislature.

SEC. 2302. CONCURRENT CARE FOR CHILDREN.

    (a) In General.--Section 1905(o)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396d(o)(1)) is amended--
        (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and 
    inserting ``subparagraphs (B) and (C)''; and
        (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
    ``(C) A voluntary election to have payment made for hospice care 
for a child (as defined by the State) shall not constitute a waiver of 
any rights of the child to be provided with, or to have payment made 
under this title for, services that are related to the treatment of the 
child's condition for which a diagnosis of terminal illness has been 
made.''.
    (b) Application to CHIP.--Section 2110(a)(23) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1397jj(a)(23)) is amended by inserting 
``(concurrent, in the case of an individual who is a child, with care 
related to the treatment of the child's condition with respect to which 
a diagnosis of terminal illness has been made'' after ``hospice care''.

SEC. 2303. STATE ELIGIBILITY OPTION FOR FAMILY PLANNING SERVICES.

    (a) Coverage as Optional Categorically Needy Group.--
        (1) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)), as amended by section 
    2001(e), is amended--
            (A) in subclause (XIX), by striking ``or'' at the end;
            (B) in subclause (XX), by adding ``or'' at the end; and
            (C) by adding at the end the following new subclause:

                    ``(XXI) who are described in subsection (ii) 
                (relating to individuals who meet certain income 
                standards);''.

        (2) Group described.--Section 1902 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
    1396a), as amended by section 2001(d), is amended by adding at the 
    end the following new subsection:
    ``(ii)(1) Individuals described in this subsection are 
individuals--
            ``(A) whose income does not exceed an income eligibility 
        level established by the State that does not exceed the highest 
        income eligibility level established under the State plan under 
        this title (or under its State child health plan under title 
        XXI) for pregnant women; and
            ``(B) who are not pregnant.
        ``(2) At the option of a State, individuals described in this 
    subsection may include individuals who, had individuals applied on 
    or before January 1, 2007, would have been made eligible pursuant 
    to the standards and processes imposed by that State for benefits 
    described in clause (XV) of the matter following subparagraph (G) 
    of section subsection (a)(10) pursuant to a waiver granted under 
    section 1115.
        ``(3) At the option of a State, for purposes of subsection 
    (a)(17)(B), in determining eligibility for services under this 
    subsection, the State may consider only the income of the applicant 
    or recipient.''.
        (3) Limitation on benefits.--Section 1902(a)(10) of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)), as amended by section 
    2001(a)(5)(A), is amended in the matter following subparagraph 
    (G)--
            (A) by striking ``and (XV)'' and inserting ``(XV)''; and
            (B) by inserting ``, and (XVI) the medical assistance made 
        available to an individual described in subsection (ii) shall 
        be limited to family planning services and supplies described 
        in section 1905(a)(4)(C) including medical diagnosis and 
        treatment services that are provided pursuant to a family 
        planning service in a family planning setting'' before the 
        semicolon.
        (4) Conforming amendments.--
            (A) Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1396d(a)), as amended by section 2001(e)(2)(A), is amended in 
        the matter preceding paragraph (1)--
                (i) in clause (xiv), by striking ``or'' at the end;
                (ii) in clause (xv), by adding ``or'' at the end; and
                (iii) by inserting after clause (xv) the following:
                ``(xvi) individuals described in section 1902(ii),''.
            (B) Section 1903(f)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)), 
        as amended by section 2001(e)(2)(B), is amended by inserting 
        ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXI),'' after ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XX),''.
    (b) Presumptive Eligibility.--
        (1) In general.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
    U.S.C. 1396 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 1920B 
    the following:


          ``presumptive eligibility for family planning services

    ``Sec. 1920C.  (a) State Option.--State plan approved under section 
1902 may provide for making medical assistance available to an 
individual described in section 1902(ii) (relating to individuals who 
meet certain income eligibility standard) during a presumptive 
eligibility period. In the case of an individual described in section 
1902(ii), such medical assistance shall be limited to family planning 
services and supplies described in 1905(a)(4)(C) and, at the State's 
option, medical diagnosis and treatment services that are provided in 
conjunction with a family planning service in a family planning 
setting.
    ``(b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
        ``(1) Presumptive eligibility period.--The term `presumptive 
    eligibility period' means, with respect to an individual described 
    in subsection (a), the period that--
            ``(A) begins with the date on which a qualified entity 
        determines, on the basis of preliminary information, that the 
        individual is described in section 1902(ii); and
            ``(B) ends with (and includes) the earlier of--
                ``(i) the day on which a determination is made with 
            respect to the eligibility of such individual for services 
            under the State plan; or
                ``(ii) in the case of such an individual who does not 
            file an application by the last day of the month following 
            the month during which the entity makes the determination 
            referred to in subparagraph (A), such last day.
        ``(2) Qualified entity.--
            ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the term 
        `qualified entity' means any entity that--
                ``(i) is eligible for payments under a State plan 
            approved under this title; and
                ``(ii) is determined by the State agency to be capable 
            of making determinations of the type described in paragraph 
            (1)(A).
            ``(B) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this paragraph 
        shall be construed as preventing a State from limiting the 
        classes of entities that may become qualified entities in order 
        to prevent fraud and abuse.
    ``(c) Administration.--
        ``(1) In general.--The State agency shall provide qualified 
    entities with--
            ``(A) such forms as are necessary for an application to be 
        made by an individual described in subsection (a) for medical 
        assistance under the State plan; and
            ``(B) information on how to assist such individuals in 
        completing and filing such forms.
        ``(2) Notification requirements.--A qualified entity that 
    determines under subsection (b)(1)(A) that an individual described 
    in subsection (a) is presumptively eligible for medical assistance 
    under a State plan shall--
            ``(A) notify the State agency of the determination within 5 
        working days after the date on which determination is made; and
            ``(B) inform such individual at the time the determination 
        is made that an application for medical assistance is required 
        to be made by not later than the last day of the month 
        following the month during which the determination is made.
        ``(3) Application for medical assistance.--In the case of an 
    individual described in subsection (a) who is determined by a 
    qualified entity to be presumptively eligible for medical 
    assistance under a State plan, the individual shall apply for 
    medical assistance by not later than the last day of the month 
    following the month during which the determination is made.
    ``(d) Payment.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, medical 
assistance that--
        ``(1) is furnished to an individual described in subsection 
    (a)--
            ``(A) during a presumptive eligibility period; and
            ``(B) by a entity that is eligible for payments under the 
        State plan; and
        ``(2) is included in the care and services covered by the State 
    plan,
shall be treated as medical assistance provided by such plan for 
purposes of clause (4) of the first sentence of section 1905(b).''.
        (2) Conforming amendments.--
            (A) Section 1902(a)(47) of the Social Security Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1396a(a)(47)), as amended by section 2202(a), is 
        amended--
                (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting before the 
            semicolon at the end the following: ``and provide for 
            making medical assistance available to individuals 
            described in subsection (a) of section 1920C during a 
            presumptive eligibility period in accordance with such 
            section''; and
                (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``or 1920B'' and 
            inserting ``1920B, or 1920C''.
            (B) Section 1903(u)(1)(D)(v) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1396b(u)(1)(D)(v)), as amended by section 2202(b), is amended 
        by inserting ``or for medical assistance provided to an 
        individual described in subsection (a) of section 1920C during 
        a presumptive eligibility period under such section,'' after 
        ``1920B during a presumptive eligibility period under such 
        section,''.
    (c) Clarification of Coverage of Family Planning Services and 
Supplies.--Section 1937(b) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-
7(b)), as amended by section 2001(c), is amended by adding at the end 
the following:
        ``(7) Coverage of family planning services and supplies.--
    Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, a State 
    may not provide for medical assistance through enrollment of an 
    individual with benchmark coverage or benchmark-equivalent coverage 
    under this section unless such coverage includes for any individual 
    described in section 1905(a)(4)(C), medical assistance for family 
    planning services and supplies in accordance with such section.''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to 
items and services furnished on or after such date.

SEC. 2304. CLARIFICATION OF DEFINITION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE.

    Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is 
amended by inserting ``or the care and services themselves, or both'' 
before ``(if provided in or after''.

 Subtitle E--New Options for States to Provide Long-Term Services and 
                                Supports

SEC. 2401. COMMUNITY FIRST CHOICE OPTION.

    Section 1915 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
    ``(k) State Plan Option To Provide Home and Community-based 
Attendant Services and Supports.--
        ``(1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of this 
    subsection, beginning October 1, 2010, a State may provide through 
    a State plan amendment for the provision of medical assistance for 
    home and community-based attendant services and supports for 
    individuals who are eligible for medical assistance under the State 
    plan whose income does not exceed 150 percent of the poverty line 
    (as defined in section 2110(c)(5)) or, if greater, the income level 
    applicable for an individual who has been determined to require an 
    institutional level of care to be eligible for nursing facility 
    services under the State plan and with respect to whom there has 
    been a determination that, but for the provision of such services, 
    the individuals would require the level of care provided in a 
    hospital, a nursing facility, an intermediate care facility for the 
    mentally retarded, or an institution for mental diseases, the cost 
    of which could be reimbursed under the State plan, but only if the 
    individual chooses to receive such home and community-based 
    attendant services and supports, and only if the State meets the 
    following requirements:
            ``(A) Availability.--The State shall make available home 
        and community-based attendant services and supports to eligible 
        individuals, as needed, to assist in accomplishing activities 
        of daily living, instrumental activities of daily living, and 
        health-related tasks through hands-on assistance, supervision, 
        or cueing--
                ``(i) under a person-centered plan of services and 
            supports that is based on an assessment of functional need 
            and that is agreed to in writing by the individual or, as 
            appropriate, the individual's representative;
                ``(ii) in a home or community setting, which does not 
            include a nursing facility, institution for mental 
            diseases, or an intermediate care facility for the mentally 
            retarded;
                ``(iii) under an agency-provider model or other model 
            (as defined in paragraph (6)(C )); and
                ``(iv) the furnishing of which--

                    ``(I) is selected, managed, and dismissed by the 
                individual, or, as appropriate, with assistance from 
                the individual's representative;
                    ``(II) is controlled, to the maximum extent 
                possible, by the individual or where appropriate, the 
                individual's representative, regardless of who may act 
                as the employer of record; and
                    ``(III) provided by an individual who is qualified 
                to provide such services, including family members (as 
                defined by the Secretary).

            ``(B) Included services and supports.--In addition to 
        assistance in accomplishing activities of daily living, 
        instrumental activities of daily living, and health related 
        tasks, the home and community-based attendant services and 
        supports made available include--
                ``(i) the acquisition, maintenance, and enhancement of 
            skills necessary for the individual to accomplish 
            activities of daily living, instrumental activities of 
            daily living, and health related tasks;
                ``(ii) back-up systems or mechanisms (such as the use 
            of beepers or other electronic devices) to ensure 
            continuity of services and supports; and
                ``(iii) voluntary training on how to select, manage, 
            and dismiss attendants.
            ``(C) Excluded services and supports.--Subject to 
        subparagraph (D), the home and community-based attendant 
        services and supports made available do not include--
                ``(i) room and board costs for the individual;
                ``(ii) special education and related services provided 
            under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and 
            vocational rehabilitation services provided under the 
            Rehabilitation Act of 1973;
                ``(iii) assistive technology devices and assistive 
            technology services other than those under (1)(B)(ii);
                ``(iv) medical supplies and equipment; or
                ``(v) home modifications.
            ``(D) Permissible services and supports.--The home and 
        community-based attendant services and supports may include--
                ``(i) expenditures for transition costs such as rent 
            and utility deposits, first month's rent and utilities, 
            bedding, basic kitchen supplies, and other necessities 
            required for an individual to make the transition from a 
            nursing facility, institution for mental diseases, or 
            intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded to a 
            community-based home setting where the individual resides; 
            and
                ``(ii) expenditures relating to a need identified in an 
            individual's person-centered plan of services that increase 
            independence or substitute for human assistance, to the 
            extent that expenditures would otherwise be made for the 
            human assistance.
        ``(2) Increased federal financial participation.--For purposes 
    of payments to a State under section 1903(a)(1), with respect to 
    amounts expended by the State to provide medical assistance under 
    the State plan for home and community-based attendant services and 
    supports to eligible individuals in accordance with this subsection 
    during a fiscal year quarter occurring during the period described 
    in paragraph (1), the Federal medical assistance percentage 
    applicable to the State (as determined under section 1905(b)) shall 
    be increased by 6 percentage points.
        ``(3) State requirements.--In order for a State plan amendment 
    to be approved under this subsection, the State shall--
            ``(A) develop and implement such amendment in collaboration 
        with a Development and Implementation Council established by 
        the State that includes a majority of members with 
        disabilities, elderly individuals, and their representatives 
        and consults and collaborates with such individuals;
            ``(B) provide consumer controlled home and community-based 
        attendant services and supports to individuals on a statewide 
        basis, in a manner that provides such services and supports in 
        the most integrated setting appropriate to the individual's 
        needs, and without regard to the individual's age, type or 
        nature of disability, severity of disability, or the form of 
        home and community-based attendant services and supports that 
        the individual requires in order to lead an independent life;
            ``(C) with respect to expenditures during the first full 
        fiscal year in which the State plan amendment is implemented, 
        maintain or exceed the level of State expenditures for medical 
        assistance that is provided under section 1905(a), section 
        1915, section 1115, or otherwise to individuals with 
        disabilities or elderly individuals attributable to the 
        preceding fiscal year;
            ``(D) establish and maintain a comprehensive, continuous 
        quality assurance system with respect to community- based 
        attendant services and supports that--
                ``(i) includes standards for agency-based and other 
            delivery models with respect to training, appeals for 
            denials and reconsideration procedures of an individual 
            plan, and other factors as determined by the Secretary;
                ``(ii) incorporates feedback from consumers and their 
            representatives, disability organizations, providers, 
            families of disabled or elderly individuals, members of the 
            community, and others and maximizes consumer independence 
            and consumer control;
                ``(iii) monitors the health and well-being of each 
            individual who receives home and community-based attendant 
            services and supports, including a process for the 
            mandatory reporting, investigation, and resolution of 
            allegations of neglect, abuse, or exploitation in 
            connection with the provision of such services and 
            supports; and
                ``(iv) provides information about the provisions of the 
            quality assurance required under clauses (i) through (iii) 
            to each individual receiving such services; and
            ``(E) collect and report information, as determined 
        necessary by the Secretary, for the purposes of approving the 
        State plan amendment, providing Federal oversight, and 
        conducting an evaluation under paragraph (5)(A), including data 
        regarding how the State provides home and community-based 
        attendant services and supports and other home and community-
        based services, the cost of such services and supports, and how 
        the State provides individuals with disabilities who otherwise 
        qualify for institutional care under the State plan or under a 
        waiver the choice to instead receive home and community-based 
        services in lieu of institutional care.
        ``(4) Compliance with certain laws.--A State shall ensure that, 
    regardless of whether the State uses an agency-provider model or 
    other models to provide home and community-based attendant services 
    and supports under a State plan amendment under this subsection, 
    such services and supports are provided in accordance with the 
    requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 and applicable 
    Federal and State laws regarding--
            ``(A) withholding and payment of Federal and State income 
        and payroll taxes;
            ``(B) the provision of unemployment and workers 
        compensation insurance;
            ``(C) maintenance of general liability insurance; and
            ``(D) occupational health and safety.
        ``(5) Evaluation, data collection, and report to congress.--
            ``(A) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall conduct an 
        evaluation of the provision of home and community-based 
        attendant services and supports under this subsection in order 
        to determine the effectiveness of the provision of such 
        services and supports in allowing the individuals receiving 
        such services and supports to lead an independent life to the 
        maximum extent possible; the impact on the physical and 
        emotional health of the individuals who receive such services; 
        and an comparative analysis of the costs of services provided 
        under the State plan amendment under this subsection and those 
        provided under institutional care in a nursing facility, 
        institution for mental diseases, or an intermediate care 
        facility for the mentally retarded.
            ``(B) Data collection.--The State shall provide the 
        Secretary with the following information regarding the 
        provision of home and community-based attendant services and 
        supports under this subsection for each fiscal year for which 
        such services and supports are provided:
                ``(i) The number of individuals who are estimated to 
            receive home and community-based attendant services and 
            supports under this subsection during the fiscal year.
                ``(ii) The number of individuals that received such 
            services and supports during the preceding fiscal year.
                ``(iii) The specific number of individuals served by 
            type of disability, age, gender, education level, and 
            employment status.
                ``(iv) Whether the specific individuals have been 
            previously served under any other home and community based 
            services program under the State plan or under a waiver.
            ``(C) Reports.--Not later than--
                ``(i) December 31, 2013, the Secretary shall submit to 
            Congress and make available to the public an interim report 
            on the findings of the evaluation under subparagraph (A); 
            and
                ``(ii) December 31, 2015, the Secretary shall submit to 
            Congress and make available to the public a final report on 
            the findings of the evaluation under subparagraph (A).
        ``(6) Definitions.--In this subsection:
            ``(A) Activities of daily living.--The term `activities of 
        daily living' includes tasks such as eating, toileting, 
        grooming, dressing, bathing, and transferring.
            ``(B) Consumer controlled.--The term `consumer controlled' 
        means a method of selecting and providing services and supports 
        that allow the individual, or where appropriate, the 
        individual's representative, maximum control of the home and 
        community-based attendant services and supports, regardless of 
        who acts as the employer of record.
            ``(C) Delivery models.--
                ``(i) Agency-provider model.--The term `agency-provider 
            model' means, with respect to the provision of home and 
            community-based attendant services and supports for an 
            individual, subject to paragraph (4), a method of providing 
            consumer controlled services and supports under which 
            entities contract for the provision of such services and 
            supports.
                ``(ii) Other models.--The term `other models' means, 
            subject to paragraph (4), methods, other than an agency-
            provider model, for the provision of consumer controlled 
            services and supports. Such models may include the 
            provision of vouchers, direct cash payments, or use of a 
            fiscal agent to assist in obtaining services.
            ``(D) Health-related tasks.--The term `health-related 
        tasks' means specific tasks related to the needs of an 
        individual, which can be delegated or assigned by licensed 
        health-care professionals under State law to be performed by an 
        attendant.
            ``(E) Individual's representative.--The term `individual's 
        representative' means a parent, family member, guardian, 
        advocate, or other authorized representative of an individual
            ``(F) Instrumental activities of daily living.--The term 
        `instrumental activities of daily living' includes (but is not 
        limited to) meal planning and preparation, managing finances, 
        shopping for food, clothing, and other essential items, 
        performing essential household chores, communicating by phone 
        or other media, and traveling around and participating in the 
        community.''.

SEC. 2402. REMOVAL OF BARRIERS TO PROVIDING HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED 
              SERVICES.

    (a) Oversight and Assessment of the Administration of Home and 
Community-based Services.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
shall promulgate regulations to ensure that all States develop service 
systems that are designed to--
        (1) allocate resources for services in a manner that is 
    responsive to the changing needs and choices of beneficiaries 
    receiving non-institutionally-based long-term services and supports 
    (including such services and supports that are provided under 
    programs other the State Medicaid program), and that provides 
    strategies for beneficiaries receiving such services to maximize 
    their independence, including through the use of client-employed 
    providers;
        (2) provide the support and coordination needed for a 
    beneficiary in need of such services (and their family caregivers 
    or representative, if applicable) to design an individualized, 
    self-directed, community-supported life; and
        (3) improve coordination among, and the regulation of, all 
    providers of such services under federally and State-funded 
    programs in order to--
            (A) achieve a more consistent administration of policies 
        and procedures across programs in relation to the provision of 
        such services; and
            (B) oversee and monitor all service system functions to 
        assure--
                (i) coordination of, and effectiveness of, eligibility 
            determinations and individual assessments;
                (ii) development and service monitoring of a complaint 
            system, a management system, a system to qualify and 
            monitor providers, and systems for role-setting and 
            individual budget determinations; and
                (iii) an adequate number of qualified direct care 
            workers to provide self-directed personal assistance 
            services.
    (b) Additional State Options.--Section 1915(i) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(i)) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new paragraphs:
        ``(6) State option to provide home and community-based services 
    to individuals eligible for services under a waiver.--
            ``(A) In general.--A State that provides home and 
        community-based services in accordance with this subsection to 
        individuals who satisfy the needs-based criteria for the 
        receipt of such services established under paragraph (1)(A) 
        may, in addition to continuing to provide such services to such 
        individuals, elect to provide home and community-based services 
        in accordance with the requirements of this paragraph to 
        individuals who are eligible for home and community-based 
        services under a waiver approved for the State under subsection 
        (c), (d), or (e) or under section 1115 to provide such 
        services, but only for those individuals whose income does not 
        exceed 300 percent of the supplemental security income benefit 
        rate established by section 1611(b)(1).
            ``(B) Application of same requirements for individuals 
        satisfying needs-based criteria.--Subject to subparagraph (C), 
        a State shall provide home and community-based services to 
        individuals under this paragraph in the same manner and subject 
        to the same requirements as apply under the other paragraphs of 
        this subsection to the provision of home and community-based 
        services to individuals who satisfy the needs-based criteria 
        established under paragraph (1)(A).
            ``(C) Authority to offer different type, amount, duration, 
        or scope of home and community-based services.--A State may 
        offer home and community-based services to individuals under 
        this paragraph that differ in type, amount, duration, or scope 
        from the home and community-based services offered for 
        individuals who satisfy the needs-based criteria established 
        under paragraph (1)(A), so long as such services are within the 
        scope of services described in paragraph (4)(B) of subsection 
        (c) for which the Secretary has the authority to approve a 
        waiver and do not include room or board.
        ``(7) State option to offer home and community-based services 
    to specific, targeted populations.--
            ``(A) In general.--A State may elect in a State plan 
        amendment under this subsection to target the provision of home 
        and community-based services under this subsection to specific 
        populations and to differ the type, amount, duration, or scope 
        of such services to such specific populations.
            ``(B) 5-year term.--
                ``(i) In general.--An election by a State under this 
            paragraph shall be for a period of 5 years.
                ``(ii) Phase-in of services and eligibility permitted 
            during initial 5-year period.--A State making an election 
            under this paragraph may, during the first 5-year period 
            for which the election is made, phase-in the enrollment of 
            eligible individuals, or the provision of services to such 
            individuals, or both, so long as all eligible individuals 
            in the State for such services are enrolled, and all such 
            services are provided, before the end of the initial 5-year 
            period.
            ``(C) Renewal.--An election by a State under this paragraph 
        may be renewed for additional 5-year terms if the Secretary 
        determines, prior to beginning of each such renewal period, 
        that the State has--
                ``(i) adhered to the requirements of this subsection 
            and paragraph in providing services under such an election; 
            and
                ``(ii) met the State's objectives with respect to 
            quality improvement and beneficiary outcomes.''.
    (c) Removal of Limitation on Scope of Services.--Paragraph (1) of 
section 1915(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(i)), as 
amended by subsection (a), is amended by striking ``or such other 
services requested by the State as the Secretary may approve''.
    (d) Optional Eligibility Category To Provide Full Medicaid Benefits 
to Individuals Receiving Home and Community-based Services Under a 
State Plan Amendment.--
        (1) In general.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii) of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)), as amended by section 
    2304(a)(1), is amended--
            (A) in subclause (XX), by striking ``or'' at the end;
            (B) in subclause (XXI), by adding ``or'' at the end; and
            (C) by inserting after subclause (XXI), the following new 
        subclause:

                    ``(XXII) who are eligible for home and community-
                based services under needs-based criteria established 
                under paragraph (1)(A) of section 1915(i), or who are 
                eligible for home and community-based services under 
                paragraph (6) of such section, and who will receive 
                home and community-based services pursuant to a State 
                plan amendment under such subsection;''.

        (2) Conforming amendments.--
            (A) Section 1903(f)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 
        U.S.C. 1396b(f)(4)), as amended by section 2304(a)(4)(B), is 
        amended in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by inserting 
        ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXII),'' after 
        ``1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XXI),''.
            (B) Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
        1396d(a)), as so amended, is amended in the matter preceding 
        paragraph (1)--
                (i) in clause (xv), by striking ``or'' at the end;
                (ii) in clause (xvi), by adding ``or'' at the end; and
                (iii) by inserting after clause (xvi) the following new 
            clause:
        ``(xvii) individuals who are eligible for home and community-
    based services under needs-based criteria established under 
    paragraph (1)(A) of section 1915(i), or who are eligible for home 
    and community-based services under paragraph (6) of such section, 
    and who will receive home and community-based services pursuant to 
    a State plan amendment under such subsection,''.
    (e) Elimination of Option To Limit Number of Eligible Individuals 
or Length of Period for Grandfathered Individuals if Eligibility 
Criteria Is Modified.--Paragraph (1) of section 1915(i) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396n(i)) is amended--
        (1) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the following:
            ``(C) Projection of number of individuals to be provided 
        home and community-based services.--The State submits to the 
        Secretary, in such form and manner, and upon such frequency as 
        the Secretary shall specify, the projected number of 
        individuals to be provided home and community-based 
        services.''; and
        (2) in subclause (II) of subparagraph (D)(ii), by striking ``to 
    be eligible for such services for a period of at least 12 months 
    beginning on the date the individual first received medical 
    assistance for such services'' and inserting ``to continue to be 
    eligible for such services after the effective date of the 
    modification and until such time as the individual no longer meets 
    the standard for receipt of such services under such pre-modified 
    criteria''.
    (f) Elimination of Option To Waive Statewideness; Addition of 
Option To Waive Comparability.--Paragraph (3) of section 1915(i) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n(3)) is amended by striking ``1902(a)(1) 
(relating to statewideness)'' and inserting ``1902(a)(10)(B) (relating 
to comparability)''.
    (g) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (b) through 
(f) take effect on the first day of the first fiscal year quarter that 
begins after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 2403. MONEY FOLLOWS THE PERSON REBALANCING DEMONSTRATION.

    (a) Extension of Demonstration.--
        (1) In general.--Section 6071(h) of the Deficit Reduction Act 
    of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 1396a note) is amended--
            (A) in paragraph (1)(E), by striking ``fiscal year 2011'' 
        and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2011 through 2016''; and
            (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``2011'' and inserting 
        ``2016''.
        (2) Evaluation.--Paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 6071(g) of 
    such Act is amended are each amended by striking ``2011'' and 
    inserting ``2016''.
    (b) Reduction of Institutional Residency Period.--
        (1) In general.--Section 6071(b)(2) of the Deficit Reduction 
    Act of 2005 (42 U.S.C. 1396a note) is amended--
            (A) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking ``, for a period of 
        not less than 6 months or for such longer minimum period, not 
        to exceed 2 years, as may be specified by the State'' and 
        inserting ``for a period of not less than 90 consecutive 
        days''; and
            (B) by adding at the end the following:
    ``Any days that an individual resides in an institution on the 
    basis of having been admitted solely for purposes of receiving 
    short-term rehabilitative services for a period for which payment 
    for such services is limited under title XVIII shall not be taken 
    into account for purposes of determining the 90-day period required 
    under subparagraph (A)(i).''.
        (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
    take effect 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.

SEC. 2404. PROTECTION FOR RECIPIENTS OF HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED 
              SERVICES AGAINST SPOUSAL IMPOVERISHMENT.

    During the 5-year period that begins on January 1, 2014, section 
1924(h)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-5(h)(1)(A)) 
shall be applied as though ``is eligible for medical assistance for 
home and community-based services provided under subsection (c), (d), 
or (i) of section 1915, under a waiver approved under section 1115, or 
who is eligible for such medical assistance by reason of being 
determined eligible under section 1902(a)(10)(C) or by reason of 
section 1902(f) or otherwise on the basis of a reduction of income 
based on costs incurred for medical or other remedial care, or who is 
eligible for medical assistance for home and community-based attendant 
services and supports under section 1915(k)'' were substituted in such 
section for ``(at the option of the State) is described in section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI)''.

SEC. 2405. FUNDING TO EXPAND STATE AGING AND DISABILITY RESOURCE 
              CENTERS.

    Out of any funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there 
is appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting 
through the Assistant Secretary for Aging, $10,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 2010 through 2014, to carry out subsections 
(a)(20)(B)(iii) and (b)(8) of section 202 of the Older Americans Act of 
1965 (42 U.S.C. 3012).

SEC. 2406. SENSE OF THE SENATE REGARDING LONG-TERM CARE.

    (a) Findings.--The Senate makes the following findings:
        (1) Nearly 2 decades have passed since Congress seriously 
    considered long-term care reform. The United States Bipartisan 
    Commission on Comprehensive Health Care, also know as the ``Pepper 
    Commission'', released its ``Call for Action'' blueprint for health 
    reform in September 1990. In the 20 years since those 
    recommendations were made, Congress has never acted on the report.
        (2) In 1999, under the United States Supreme Court's decision 
    in Olmstead v. L.C., 527 U.S. 581 (1999), individuals with 
    disabilities have the right to choose to receive their long-term 
    services and supports in the community, rather than in an 
    institutional setting.
        (3) Despite the Pepper Commission and Olmstead decision, the 
    long-term care provided to our Nation's elderly and disabled has 
    not improved. In fact, for many, it has gotten far worse.
        (4) In 2007, 69 percent of Medicaid long-term care spending for 
    elderly individuals and adults with physical disabilities paid for 
    institutional services. Only 6 states spent 50 percent or more of 
    their Medicaid long-term care dollars on home and community-based 
    services for elderly individuals and adults with physical 
    disabilities while \1/2\ of the States spent less than 25 percent. 
    This disparity continues even though, on average, it is estimated 
    that Medicaid dollars can support nearly 3 elderly individuals and 
    adults with physical disabilities in home and community-based 
    services for every individual in a nursing home. Although every 
    State has chosen to provide certain services under home and 
    community-based waivers, these services are unevenly available 
    within and across States, and reach a small percentage of eligible 
    individuals.
    (b) Sense of the Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that--
        (1) during the 111th session of Congress, Congress should 
    address long-term services and supports in a comprehensive way that 
    guarantees elderly and disabled individuals the care they need; and
        (2) long term services and supports should be made available in 
    the community in addition to in institutions.

            Subtitle F--Medicaid Prescription Drug Coverage

SEC. 2501. PRESCRIPTION DRUG REBATES.

    (a) Increase in Minimum Rebate Percentage for Single Source Drugs 
and Innovator Multiple Source Drugs.--
        (1) In general.--Section 1927(c)(1)(B) of the Social Security 
    Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(1)(B)) is amended--
            (A) in clause (i)--
                (i) in subclause (IV), by striking ``and'' at the end;
                (ii) in subclause (V)--

                    (I) by inserting ``and before January 1, 2010'' 
                after ``December 31, 1995,''; and
                    (II) by striking the period at the end and 
                inserting ``; and''; and

                (iii) by adding at the end the following new subclause:

                    ``(VI) except as provided in clause (iii), after 
                December 31, 2009, 23.1 percent.''; and

            (B) by adding at the end the following new clause:
                ``(iii) Minimum rebate percentage for certain drugs.--

                    ``(I) In general.--In the case of a single source 
                drug or an innovator multiple source drug described in 
                subclause (II), the minimum rebate percentage for 
                rebate periods specified in clause (i)(VI) is 17.1 
                percent.
                    ``(II) Drug described.--For purposes of subclause 
                (I), a single source drug or an innovator multiple 
                source drug described in this subclause is any of the 
                following drugs:

                        ``(aa) A clotting factor for which a separate 
                    furnishing payment is made under section 1842(o)(5) 
                    and which is included on a list of such factors 
                    specified and updated regularly by the Secretary.
                        ``(bb) A drug approved by the Food and Drug 
                    Administration exclusively for pediatric 
                    indications.''.
        (2) Recapture of total savings due to increase.--Section 
    1927(b)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(1)) is amended by 
    adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
            ``(C) Special rule for increased minimum rebate 
        percentage.--
                ``(i) In general.--In addition to the amounts applied 
            as a reduction under subparagraph (B), for rebate periods 
            beginning on or after January 1, 2010, during a fiscal 
            year, the Secretary shall reduce payments to a State under 
            section 1903(a) in the manner specified in clause (ii), in 
            an amount equal to the product of--

                    ``(I) 100 percent minus the Federal medical 
                assistance percentage applicable to the rebate period 
                for the State; and
                    ``(II) the amounts received by the State under such 
                subparagraph that are attributable (as estimated by the 
                Secretary based on utilization and other data) to the 
                increase in the minimum rebate percentage effected by 
                the amendments made by subsections (a)(1), (b), and (d) 
                of section 2501 of the Patient Protection and 
                Affordable Care Act, taking into account the additional 
                drugs included under the amendments made by subsection 
                (c) of section 2501 of such Act.

            The Secretary shall adjust such payment reduction for a 
            calendar quarter to the extent the Secretary determines, 
            based upon subsequent utilization and other data, that the 
            reduction for such quarter was greater or less than the 
            amount of payment reduction that should have been made.
                ``(ii) Manner of payment reduction.--The amount of the 
            payment reduction under clause (i) for a State for a 
            quarter shall be deemed an overpayment to the State under 
            this title to be disallowed against the State's regular 
            quarterly draw for all Medicaid spending under section 
            1903(d)(2). Such a disallowance is not subject to a 
            reconsideration under section 1116(d).''.
    (b) Increase in Rebate for Other Drugs.--Section 1927(c)(3)(B) of 
such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(3)(B)) is amended--
        (1) in clause (i), by striking ``and'' at the end;
        (2) in clause (ii)--
            (A) by inserting ``and before January 1, 2010,'' after 
        ``December 31, 1993,''; and
            (B) by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and
        (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
                ``(iii) after December 31, 2009, is 13 percent.''.
    (c) Extension of Prescription Drug Discounts to Enrollees of 
Medicaid Managed Care Organizations.--
        (1) In general.--Section 1903(m)(2)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
    1396b(m)(2)(A)) is amended--
            (A) in clause (xi), by striking ``and'' at the end;
            (B) in clause (xii), by striking the period at the end and 
        inserting ``; and''; and
            (C) by adding at the end the following:
                ``(xiii) such contract provides that (I) covered 
            outpatient drugs dispensed to individuals eligible for 
            medical assistance who are enrolled with the entity shall 
            be subject to the same rebate required by the agreement 
            entered into under section 1927 as the State is subject to 
            and that the State shall collect such rebates from 
            manufacturers, (II) capitation rates paid to the entity 
            shall be based on actual cost experience related to rebates 
            and subject to the Federal regulations requiring 
            actuarially sound rates, and (III) the entity shall report 
            to the State, on such timely and periodic basis as 
            specified by the Secretary in order to include in the 
            information submitted by the State to a manufacturer and 
            the Secretary under section 1927(b)(2)(A), information on 
            the total number of units of each dosage form and strength 
            and package size by National Drug Code of each covered 
            outpatient drug dispensed to individuals eligible for 
            medical assistance who are enrolled with the entity and for 
            which the entity is responsible for coverage of such drug 
            under this subsection (other than covered outpatient drugs 
            that under subsection (j)(1) of section 1927 are not 
            subject to the requirements of that section) and such other 
            data as the Secretary determines necessary to carry out 
            this subsection.''.
        (2) Conforming amendments.--Section 1927 (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8) is 
    amended--
            (A) in subsection (b)--
                (i) in paragraph (1)(A), in the first sentence, by 
            inserting ``, including such drugs dispensed to individuals 
            enrolled with a medicaid managed care organization if the 
            organization is responsible for coverage of such drugs'' 
            before the period; and
                (ii) in paragraph (2)(A), by inserting ``including such 
            information reported by each medicaid managed care 
            organization,'' after ``for which payment was made under 
            the plan during the period,''; and
            (B) in subsection (j), by striking paragraph (1) and 
        inserting the following:
        ``(1) Covered outpatient drugs are not subject to the 
    requirements of this section if such drugs are--
            ``(A) dispensed by health maintenance organizations, 
        including Medicaid managed care organizations that contract 
        under section 1903(m); and
            ``(B) subject to discounts under section 340B of the Public 
        Health Service Act.''.
    (d) Additional Rebate for New Formulations of Existing Drugs.--
        (1) In general.--Section 1927(c)(2) of the Social Security Act 
    (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the 
    following new subparagraph:
            ``(C) Treatment of new formulations.--
                ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in clause (ii), 
            in the case of a drug that is a new formulation, such as an 
            extended-release formulation, of a single source drug or an 
            innovator multiple source drug, the rebate obligation with 
            respect to the drug under this section shall be the amount 
            computed under this section for the new formulation of the 
            drug or, if greater, the product of--

                    ``(I) the average manufacturer price for each 
                dosage form and strength of the new formulation of the 
                single source drug or innovator multiple source drug;
                    ``(II) the highest additional rebate (calculated as 
                a percentage of average manufacturer price) under this 
                section for any strength of the original single source 
                drug or innovator multiple source drug; and
                    ``(III) the total number of units of each dosage 
                form and strength of the new formulation paid for under 
                the State plan in the rebate period (as reported by the 
                State).

                ``(ii) No application to new formulations of orphan 
            drugs.--Clause (i) shall not apply to a new formulation of 
            a covered outpatient drug that is or has been designated 
            under section 526 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
            Act (21 U.S.C. 360bb) for a rare disease or condition, 
            without regard to whether the period of market exclusivity 
            for the drug under section 527 of such Act has expired or 
            the specific indication for use of the drug.''.
        (2) Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall 
    apply to drugs that are paid for by a State after December 31, 
    2009.
    (e) Maximum Rebate Amount.--Section 1927(c)(2) of such Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396r-8(c)(2)), as amended by subsection (d), is amended by 
adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
            ``(D) Maximum rebate amount.--In no case shall the sum of 
        the amounts applied under paragraph (1)(A)(ii) and this 
        paragraph with respect to each dosage form and strength of a 
        single source drug or an innovator multiple source drug for a 
        rebate period beginning after December 31, 2009, exceed 100 
        percent of the average manufacturer price of the drug.''.
    (f) Conforming Amendments.--
        (1) In general.--Section 340B of the Public Health Service Act 
    (42 U.S.C. 256b) is amended--
            (A) in subsection (a)(2)(B)(i), by striking ``1927(c)(4)'' 
        and inserting ``1927(c)(3)''; and
            (B) by striking subsection (c); and
            (C) redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (c).
        (2) Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection 
    take effect on January 1, 2010.

SEC. 2502. ELIMINATION OF EXCLUSION OF COVERAGE OF CERTAIN DRUGS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1927(d) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1397r-8(d)) is amended--
        (1) in paragraph (2)--
            (A) by striking subparagraphs (E), (I), and (J), 
        respectively; and
            (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (F), (G), (H), and (K) 
        as subparagraphs (E), (F), (G), and (H), respectively; and
        (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
        ``(7) Non-excludable drugs.--The following drugs or classes of 
    drugs, or their medical uses, shall not be excluded from coverage:
            ``(A) Agents when used to promote smoking cessation, 
        including agents approved by the Food and Drug Administration 
        under the over-the-counter monograph process for purposes of 
        promoting, and when used to promote, tobacco cessation.
            ``(B) Barbiturates.
            ``(C) Benzodiazepines.''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2014.

SEC. 2503. PROVIDING ADEQUATE PHARMACY REIMBURSEMENT.

    (a) Pharmacy Reimbursement Limits.--
        (1) In general.--Section 1927(e) of the Social Security Act (42 
    U.S.C. 1396r-8(e)) is amended--
            (A) in paragraph (4), by striking ``(or, effective January 
        1, 2007, two or more)''; and
            (B) by striking paragraph (5) and inserting the following:
        ``(5) Use of amp in upper payment limits.--The Secretary shall 
    calculate the Federal upper reimbursement limit established under 
    paragraph (4) as no less than 175 percent of the weighted average 
    (determined on the basis of utilization) of the most recently 
    reported monthly average manufacturer prices for pharmaceutically 
    and therapeutically equivalent multiple source drug products that 
    are available for purchase by retail community pharmacies on a 
    nationwide basis. The Secretary shall implement a smoothing process 
    for average manufacturer prices. Such process shall be similar to 
    the smoothing process used in determining the average sales price 
    of a drug or biological under section 1847A.''.
        (2) Definition of amp.--Section 1927(k)(1) of such Act (42 
    U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)(1)) is amended--
            (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``by'' and all that 
        follows through the period and inserting ``by--
                ``(i) wholesalers for drugs distributed to retail 
            community pharmacies; and
                ``(ii) retail community pharmacies that purchase drugs 
            directly from the manufacturer.''; and
            (B) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the 
        following:
            ``(B) Exclusion of customary prompt pay discounts and other 
        payments.--
                ``(i) In general.--The average manufacturer price for a 
            covered outpatient drug shall exclude--

                    ``(I) customary prompt pay discounts extended to 
                wholesalers;
                    ``(II) bona fide service fees paid by manufacturers 
                to wholesalers or retail community pharmacies, 
                including (but not limited to) distribution service 
                fees, inventory management fees, product stocking 
                allowances, and fees associated with administrative 
                services agreements and patient care programs (such as 
                medication compliance programs and patient education 
                programs);
                    ``(III) reimbursement by manufacturers for 
                recalled, damaged, expired, or otherwise unsalable 
                returned goods, including (but not limited to) 
                reimbursement for the cost of the goods and any 
                reimbursement of costs associated with return goods 
                handling and processing, reverse logistics, and drug 
                destruction; and
                    ``(IV) payments received from, and rebates or 
                discounts provided to, pharmacy benefit managers, 
                managed care organizations, health maintenance 
                organizations, insurers, hospitals, clinics, mail order 
                pharmacies, long term care providers, manufacturers, or 
                any other entity that does not conduct business as a 
                wholesaler or a retail community pharmacy.

                ``(ii) Inclusion of other discounts and payments.--
            Notwithstanding clause (i), any other discounts, rebates, 
            payments, or other financial transactions that are received 
            by, paid by, or passed through to, retail community 
            pharmacies shall be included in the average manufacturer 
            price for a covered outpatient drug.''; and
            (C) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``the retail pharmacy 
        class of trade'' and inserting ``retail community pharmacies''.
        (3) Definition of multiple source drug.--Section 1927(k)(7) of 
    such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)(7)) is amended--
            (A) in subparagraph (A)(i)(III), by striking ``the State'' 
        and inserting ``the United States''; and
            (B) in subparagraph (C)--
                (i) in clause (i), by inserting ``and'' after the 
            semicolon;
                (ii) in clause (ii), by striking ``; and'' and 
            inserting a period; and
                (iii) by striking clause (iii).
        (4) Definitions of retail community pharmacy; wholesaler.--
    Section 1927(k) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(k)) is amended by 
    adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
        ``(10) Retail community pharmacy.--The term `retail community 
    pharmacy' means an independent pharmacy, a chain pharmacy, a 
    supermarket pharmacy, or a mass merchandiser pharmacy that is 
    licensed as a pharmacy by the State and that dispenses medications 
    to the general public at retail prices. Such term does not include 
    a pharmacy that dispenses prescription medications to patients 
    primarily through the mail, nursing home pharmacies, long-term care 
    facility pharmacies, hospital pharmacies, clinics, charitable or 
    not-for-profit pharmacies, government pharmacies, or pharmacy 
    benefit managers.
        ``(11) Wholesaler.--The term `wholesaler' means a drug 
    wholesaler that is engaged in wholesale distribution of 
    prescription drugs to retail community pharmacies, including (but 
    not limited to) manufacturers, repackers, distributors, own-label 
    distributors, private-label distributors, jobbers, brokers, 
    warehouses (including manufacturer's and distributor's warehouses, 
    chain drug warehouses, and wholesale drug warehouses) independent 
    wholesale drug traders, and retail community pharmacies that 
    conduct wholesale distributions.''.
    (b) Disclosure of Price Information to the Public.--Section 
1927(b)(3) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(3)) is amended--
        (1) in subparagraph (A)--
            (A) in the first sentence, by inserting after clause (iii) 
        the following:
                ``(iv) not later than 30 days after the last day of 
            each month of a rebate period under the agreement, on the 
            manufacturer's total number of units that are used to 
            calculate the monthly average manufacturer price for each 
            covered outpatient drug;''; and
            (B) in the second sentence, by inserting ``(relating to the 
        weighted average of the most recently reported monthly average 
        manufacturer prices)'' after ``(D)(v)''; and
        (2) in subparagraph (D)(v), by striking ``average manufacturer 
    prices'' and inserting ``the weighted average of the most recently 
    reported monthly average manufacturer prices and the average retail 
    survey price determined for each multiple source drug in accordance 
    with subsection (f)''.
    (c) Clarification of Application of Survey of Retail Prices.--
Section 1927(f)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396r-8(b)(1)) is amended--
        (1) in subparagraph (A)(i), by inserting ``with respect to a 
    retail community pharmacy,'' before ``the determination''; and
        (2) in subparagraph (C)(ii), by striking ``retail pharmacies'' 
    and inserting ``retail community pharmacies''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on the first day of the first calendar year quarter that begins 
at least 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, without 
regard to whether or not final regulations to carry out such amendments 
have been promulgated by such date.

  Subtitle G--Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) Payments

SEC. 2551. DISPROPORTIONATE SHARE HOSPITAL PAYMENTS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1923(f) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396r-4(f)) is amended--
        (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and (3)'' and inserting ``, 
    (3), and (7)'';
        (2) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking ``paragraph (6)'' and 
    inserting ``paragraphs (6) and (7)'';
        (3) by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8); and
        (4) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new 
    paragraph:
        ``(7) Reduction of state dsh allotments once reduction in 
    uninsured threshold reached.--
            ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (E), the DSH 
        allotment for a State for fiscal years beginning with the 
        fiscal year described in subparagraph (C) (with respect to the 
        State), is equal to--
                ``(i) in the case of the first fiscal year described in 
            subparagraph (C) with respect to a State, the DSH allotment 
            that would be determined under this subsection for the 
            State for the fiscal year without application of this 
            paragraph (but after the application of subparagraph (D)), 
            reduced by the applicable percentage determined for the 
            State for the fiscal year under subparagraph (B)(i); and
                ``(ii) in the case of any subsequent fiscal year with 
            respect to the State, the DSH allotment determined under 
            this paragraph for the State for the preceding fiscal year, 
            reduced by the applicable percentage determined for the 
            State for the fiscal year under subparagraph (B)(ii).
            ``(B) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of subparagraph 
        (A), the applicable percentage for a State for a fiscal year is 
        the following:
                ``(i) Uninsured reduction threshold fiscal year.--In 
            the case of the first fiscal year described in subparagraph 
            (C) with respect to the State--

                    ``(I) if the State is a low DSH State described in 
                paragraph (5)(B), the applicable percentage is equal to 
                25 percent; and
                    ``(II) if the State is any other State, the 
                applicable percentage is 50 percent.

                ``(ii) Subsequent fiscal years in which the percentage 
            of uninsured decreases.--In the case of any fiscal year 
            after the first fiscal year described in subparagraph (C) 
            with respect to a State, if the Secretary determines on the 
            basis of the most recent American Community Survey of the 
            Bureau of the Census, that the percentage of uncovered 
            individuals residing in the State is less than the 
            percentage of such individuals determined for the State for 
            the preceding fiscal year--

                    ``(I) if the State is a low DSH State described in 
                paragraph (5)(B), the applicable percentage is equal to 
                the product of the percentage reduction in uncovered 
                individuals for the fiscal year from the preceding 
                fiscal year and 25 percent; and
                    ``(II) if the State is any other State, the 
                applicable percentage is equal to the product of the 
                percentage reduction in uncovered individuals for the 
                fiscal year from the preceding fiscal year and 50 
                percent.

            ``(C) Fiscal year described.--For purposes of subparagraph 
        (A), the fiscal year described in this subparagraph with 
        respect to a State is the first fiscal year that occurs after 
        fiscal year 2012 for which the Secretary determines, on the 
        basis of the most recent American Community Survey of the 
        Bureau of the Census, that the percentage of uncovered 
        individuals residing in the State is at least 45 percent less 
        than the percentage of such individuals determined for the 
        State for fiscal year 2009.
            ``(D) Exclusion of portions diverted for coverage 
        expansions.--For purposes of applying the applicable percentage 
        reduction under subparagraph (A) to the DSH allotment for a 
        State for a fiscal year, the DSH allotment for a State that 
        would be determined under this subsection for the State for the 
        fiscal year without the application of this paragraph (and 
        prior to any such reduction) shall not include any portion of 
        the allotment for which the Secretary has approved the State's 
        diversion to the costs of providing medical assistance or other 
        health benefits coverage under a waiver that is in effect on 
        July 2009.
            ``(E) Minimum allotment.--In no event shall the DSH 
        allotment determined for a State in accordance with this 
        paragraph for fiscal year 2013 or any succeeding fiscal year be 
        less than the amount equal to 35 percent of the DSH allotment 
        determined for the State for fiscal year 2012 under this 
        subsection (and after the application of this paragraph, if 
        applicable), increased by the percentage change in the consumer 
        price index for all urban consumers (all items, U.S. city 
        average) for each previous fiscal year occurring before the 
        fiscal year.
            ``(F) Uncovered individuals.--In this paragraph, the term 
        `uncovered individuals' means individuals with no health 
        insurance coverage at any time during a year (as determined by 
        the Secretary based on the most recent data available).''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) take 
effect on October 1, 2011.

   Subtitle H--Improved Coordination for Dual Eligible Beneficiaries

SEC. 2601. 5-YEAR PERIOD FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

    (a) In General.--Section 1915(h) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396n(h)) is amended--
        (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(h)'';
        (2) by inserting ``, or a waiver described in paragraph (2)'' 
    after ``(e)''; and
        (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
    ``(2)(A) Notwithstanding subsections (c)(3) and (d) (3), any waiver 
under subsection (b), (c), or (d), or a waiver under section 1115, that 
provides medical assistance for dual eligible individuals (including 
any such waivers under which non dual eligible individuals may be 
enrolled in addition to dual eligible individuals) may be conducted for 
a period of 5 years and, upon the request of the State, may be extended 
for additional 5-year periods unless the Secretary determines that for 
the previous waiver period the conditions for the waiver have not been 
met or it would no longer be cost-effective and efficient, or 
consistent with the purposes of this title, to extend the waiver.
    ``(B) In this paragraph, the term `dual eligible individual' means 
an individual who is entitled to, or enrolled for, benefits under part 
A of title XVIII, or enrolled for benefits under part B of title XVIII, 
and is eligible for medical assistance under the State plan under this 
title or under a waiver of such plan.''.
    (b) Conforming Amendments.--
        (1) Section 1915 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396n) is amended--
            (A) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following 
        new sentence: ``Subsection (h)(2) shall apply to a waiver under 
        this subsection.'';
            (B) in subsection (c)(3), in the second sentence, by 
        inserting ``(other than a waiver described in subsection 
        (h)(2))'' after ``A waiver under this subsection'';
            (C) in subsection (d)(3), in the second sentence, by 
        inserting ``(other than a waiver described in subsection 
        (h)(2))'' after ``A waiver under this subsection''.
        (2) Section 1115 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1315) is amended--
            (A) in subsection (e)(2), by inserting ``(5 years, in the 
        case of a waiver described in section 1915(h)(2))'' after ``3 
        years''; and
            (B) in subsection (f)(6), by inserting ``(5 years, in the 
        case of a waiver described in section 1915(h)(2))'' after ``3 
        years''.

SEC. 2602. PROVIDING FEDERAL COVERAGE AND PAYMENT COORDINATION FOR DUAL 
              ELIGIBLE BENEFICIARIES.

    (a) Establishment of Federal Coordinated Health Care Office.--
        (1) In general.--Not later than March 1, 2010, the Secretary of 
    Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the 
    ``Secretary'') shall establish a Federal Coordinated Health Care 
    Office.
        (2) Establishment and reporting to cms administrator.--The 
    Federal Coordinated Health Care Office--
            (A) shall be established within the Centers for Medicare & 
        Medicaid Services; and
            (B) have as the Office a Director who shall be appointed 
        by, and be in direct line of authority to, the Administrator of 
        the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
    (b) Purpose.--The purpose of the Federal Coordinated Health Care 
Office is to bring together officers and employees of the Medicare and 
Medicaid programs at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services in 
order to--
        (1) more effectively integrate benefits under the Medicare 
    program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act and the 
    Medicaid program under title XIX of such Act; and
        (2) improve the coordination between the Federal Government and 
    States for individuals eligible for benefits under both such 
    programs in order to ensure that such individuals get full access 
    to the items and services to which they are entitled under titles 
    XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act.
    (c) Goals.--The goals of the Federal Coordinated Health Care Office 
are as follows:
        (1) Providing dual eligible individuals full access to the 
    benefits to which such individuals are entitled under the Medicare 
    and Medicaid programs.
        (2) Simplifying the processes for dual eligible individuals to 
    access the items and services they are entitled to under the 
    Medicare and Medicaid programs.
        (3) Improving the quality of health care and long-term services 
    for dual eligible individuals.
        (4) Increasing dual eligible individuals' understanding of and 
    satisfaction with coverage under the Medicare and Medicaid 
    programs.
        (5) Eliminating regulatory conflicts between rules under the 
    Medicare and Medicaid programs.
        (6) Improving care continuity and ensuring safe and effective 
    care transitions for dual eligible individuals.
        (7) Eliminating cost-shifting between the Medicare and Medicaid 
    program and among related health care providers.
        (8) Improving the quality of performance of providers of 
    services and suppliers under the Medicare and Medicaid programs.
    (d) Specific Responsibilities.--The specific responsibilities of 
the Federal Coordinated Health Care Office are as follows:
        (1) Providing States, specialized MA plans for special needs 
    individuals (as defined in section 1859(b)(6) of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-28(b)(6))), physicians and other 
    relevant entities or individuals with the education and tools 
    necessary for developing programs that align benefits under the 
    Medicare and Medicaid programs for dual eligible individuals.
        (2) Supporting State efforts to coordinate and align acute care 
    and long-term care services for dual eligible individuals with 
    other items and services furnished under the Medicare program.
        (3) Providing support for coordination of contracting and 
    oversight by States and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
    Services with respect to the integration of the Medicare and 
    Medicaid programs in a manner that is supportive of the goals 
    described in paragraph (3).
        (4) To consult and coordinate with the Medicare Payment 
    Advisory Commission established under section 1805 of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395b-6) and the Medicaid and CHIP Payment 
    and Access Commission established under section 1900 of such Act 
    (42 U.S.C. 1396) with respect to policies relating to the 
    enrollment in, and provision of, benefits to dual eligible 
    individuals under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the 
    Social Security Act and the Medicaid program under title XIX of 
    such Act.
        (5) To study the provision of drug coverage for new full-
    benefit dual eligible individuals (as defined in section 1935(c)(6) 
    of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396u-5(c)(6)), as well as to 
    monitor and report annual total expenditures, health outcomes, and 
    access to benefits for all dual eligible individuals.
    (e) Report.--The Secretary shall, as part of the budget transmitted 
under section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, submit to 
Congress an annual report containing recommendations for legislation 
that would improve care coordination and benefits for dual eligible 
individuals.
    (f) Dual Eligible Defined.--In this section, the term ``dual 
eligible individual'' means an individual who is entitled to, or 
enrolled for, benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social 
Security Act, or enrolled for benefits under part B of title XVIII of 
such Act, and is eligible for medical assistance under a State plan 
under title XIX of such Act or under a waiver of such plan.

    Subtitle I--Improving the Quality of Medicaid for Patients and 
                               Providers

SEC. 2701. ADULT HEALTH QUALITY MEASURES.

    Title XI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1301 et seq.), as 
amended by section 401 of the Children's Health Insurance Program 
Reauthorization Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-3), is amended by inserting 
after section 1139A the following new section:

``SEC. 1139B. ADULT HEALTH QUALITY MEASURES.

    ``(a) Development of Core Set of Health Care Quality Measures for 
Adults Eligible for Benefits Under Medicaid.--The Secretary shall 
identify and publish a recommended core set of adult health quality 
measures for Medicaid eligible adults in the same manner as the 
Secretary identifies and publishes a core set of child health quality 
measures under section 1139A, including with respect to identifying and 
publishing existing adult health quality measures that are in use under 
public and privately sponsored health care coverage arrangements, or 
that are part of reporting systems that measure both the presence and 
duration of health insurance coverage over time, that may be applicable 
to Medicaid eligible adults.
    ``(b) Deadlines.--
        ``(1) Recommended measures.--Not later than January 1, 2011, 
    the Secretary shall identify and publish for comment a recommended 
    core set of adult health quality measures for Medicaid eligible 
    adults.
        ``(2) Dissemination.--Not later than January 1, 2012, the 
    Secretary shall publish an initial core set of adult health quality 
    measures that are applicable to Medicaid eligible adults.
        ``(3) Standardized reporting.--Not later than January 1, 2013, 
    the Secretary, in consultation with States, shall develop a 
    standardized format for reporting information based on the initial 
    core set of adult health quality measures and create procedures to 
    encourage States to use such measures to voluntarily report 
    information regarding the quality of health care for Medicaid 
    eligible adults.
        ``(4) Reports to congress.--Not later than January 1, 2014, and 
    every 3 years thereafter, the Secretary shall include in the report 
    to Congress required under section 1139A(a)(6) information similar 
    to the information required under that section with respect to the 
    measures established under this section.
        ``(5) Establishment of medicaid quality measurement program.--
            ``(A) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the 
        release of the recommended core set of adult health quality 
        measures under paragraph (1)), the Secretary shall establish a 
        Medicaid Quality Measurement Program in the same manner as the 
        Secretary establishes the pediatric quality measures program 
        under section 1139A(b). The aggregate amount awarded by the 
        Secretary for grants and contracts for the development, 
        testing, and validation of emerging and innovative evidence-
        based measures under such program shall equal the aggregate 
        amount awarded by the Secretary for grants under section 
        1139A(b)(4)(A)
            ``(B) Revising, strengthening, and improving initial core 
        measures.--Beginning not later than 24 months after the 
        establishment of the Medicaid Quality Measurement Program, and 
        annually thereafter, the Secretary shall publish recommended 
        changes to the initial core set of adult health quality 
        measures that shall reflect the results of the testing, 
        validation, and consensus process for the development of adult 
        health quality measures.
    ``(c) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
supporting the restriction of coverage, under title XIX or XXI or 
otherwise, to only those services that are evidence-based, or in anyway 
limiting available services.
    ``(d) Annual State Reports Regarding State-Specific Quality of Care 
Measures Applied Under Medicaid.--
        ``(1) Annual state reports.--Each State with a State plan or 
    waiver approved under title XIX shall annually report (separately 
    or as part of the annual report required under section 1139A(c)), 
    to the Secretary on the--
            ``(A) State-specific adult health quality measures applied 
        by the State under the such plan, including measures described 
        in subsection (a)(5); and
            ``(B) State-specific information on the quality of health 
        care furnished to Medicaid eligible adults under such plan, 
        including information collected through external quality 
        reviews of managed care organizations under section 1932 and 
        benchmark plans under section 1937.
        ``(2) Publication.--Not later than September 30, 2014, and 
    annually thereafter, the Secretary shall collect, analyze, and make 
    publicly available the information reported by States under 
    paragraph (1).
    ``(e) Appropriation.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated for each of fiscal years 
2010 through 2014, $60,000,000 for the purpose of carrying out this 
section. Funds appropriated under this subsection shall remain 
available until expended.''.

SEC. 2702. PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT FOR HEALTH CARE-ACQUIRED CONDITIONS.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
this subsection referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall identify 
current State practices that prohibit payment for health care-acquired 
conditions and shall incorporate the practices identified, or elements 
of such practices, which the Secretary determines appropriate for 
application to the Medicaid program in regulations. Such regulations 
shall be effective as of July 1, 2011, and shall prohibit payments to 
States under section 1903 of the Social Security Act for any amounts 
expended for providing medical assistance for health care-acquired 
conditions specified in the regulations. The regulations shall ensure 
that the prohibition on payment for health care-acquired conditions 
shall not result in a loss of access to care or services for Medicaid 
beneficiaries.
    (b) Health Care-Acquired Condition.--In this section. the term 
``health care-acquired condition'' means a medical condition for which 
an individual was diagnosed that could be identified by a secondary 
diagnostic code described in section 1886(d)(4)(D)(iv) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(4)(D)(iv)).
    (c) Medicare Provisions.--In carrying out this section, the 
Secretary shall apply to State plans (or waivers) under title XIX of 
the Social Security Act the regulations promulgated pursuant to section 
1886(d)(4)(D) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww(d)(4)(D)) relating to the 
prohibition of payments based on the presence of a secondary diagnosis 
code specified by the Secretary in such regulations, as appropriate for 
the Medicaid program. The Secretary may exclude certain conditions 
identified under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for non-payment 
under title XIX of such Act when the Secretary finds the inclusion of 
such conditions to be inapplicable to beneficiaries under title XIX.

SEC. 2703. STATE OPTION TO PROVIDE HEALTH HOMES FOR ENROLLEES WITH 
              CHRONIC CONDITIONS.

    (a) State Plan Amendment.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a et seq.), as amended by sections 2201 and 2305, is amended 
by adding at the end the following new section:
    ``Sec. 1945. State Option To Provide Coordinated Care Through a 
Health Home for Individuals With Chronic Conditions.--
    ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding section 1902(a)(1) (relating to 
statewideness), section 1902(a)(10)(B) (relating to comparability), and 
any other provision of this title for which the Secretary determines it 
is necessary to waive in order to implement this section, beginning 
January 1, 2011, a State, at its option as a State plan amendment, may 
provide for medical assistance under this title to eligible individuals 
with chronic conditions who select a designated provider (as described 
under subsection (h)(5)), a team of health care professionals (as 
described under subsection (h)(6)) operating with such a provider, or a 
health team (as described under subsection (h)(7)) as the individual's 
health home for purposes of providing the individual with health home 
services.
    ``(b) Health Home Qualification Standards.--The Secretary shall 
establish standards for qualification as a designated provider for the 
purpose of being eligible to be a health home for purposes of this 
section.
    ``(c) Payments.--
        ``(1) In general.--A State shall provide a designated provider, 
    a team of health care professionals operating with such a provider, 
    or a health team with payments for the provision of health home 
    services to each eligible individual with chronic conditions that 
    selects such provider, team of health care professionals, or health 
    team as the individual's health home. Payments made to a designated 
    provider, a team of health care professionals operating with such a 
    provider, or a health team for such services shall be treated as 
    medical assistance for purposes of section 1903(a), except that, 
    during the first 8 fiscal year quarters that the State plan 
    amendment is in effect, the Federal medical assistance percentage 
    applicable to such payments shall be equal to 90 percent.
        ``(2) Methodology.--
            ``(A) In general.--The State shall specify in the State 
        plan amendment the methodology the State will use for 
        determining payment for the provision of health home services. 
        Such methodology for determining payment--
                ``(i) may be tiered to reflect, with respect to each 
            eligible individual with chronic conditions provided such 
            services by a designated provider, a team of health care 
            professionals operating with such a provider, or a health 
            team, as well as the severity or number of each such 
            individual's chronic conditions or the specific 
            capabilities of the provider, team of health care 
            professionals, or health team; and
                ``(ii) shall be established consistent with section 
            1902(a)(30)(A).
            ``(B) Alternate models of payment.--The methodology for 
        determining payment for provision of health home services under 
        this section shall not be limited to a per-member per-month 
        basis and may provide (as proposed by the State and subject to 
        approval by the Secretary) for alternate models of payment.
        ``(3) Planning grants.--
            ``(A) In general.--Beginning January 1, 2011, the Secretary 
        may award planning grants to States for purposes of developing 
        a State plan amendment under this section. A planning grant 
        awarded to a State under this paragraph shall remain available 
        until expended.
            ``(B) State contribution.--A State awarded a planning grant 
        shall contribute an amount equal to the State percentage 
        determined under section 1905(b) (without regard to section 
        5001 of Public Law 111-5) for each fiscal year for which the 
        grant is awarded.
            ``(C) Limitation.--The total amount of payments made to 
        States under this paragraph shall not exceed $25,000,000.
    ``(d) Hospital Referrals.--A State shall include in the State plan 
amendment a requirement for hospitals that are participating providers 
under the State plan or a waiver of such plan to establish procedures 
for referring any eligible individuals with chronic conditions who seek 
or need treatment in a hospital emergency department to designated 
providers.
    ``(e) Coordination.--A State shall consult and coordinate, as 
appropriate, with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration in addressing issues regarding the prevention and 
treatment of mental illness and substance abuse among eligible 
individuals with chronic conditions.
    ``(f) Monitoring.--A State shall include in the State plan 
amendment--
        ``(1) a methodology for tracking avoidable hospital 
    readmissions and calculating savings that result from improved 
    chronic care coordination and management under this section; and
        ``(2) a proposal for use of health information technology in 
    providing health home services under this section and improving 
    service delivery and coordination across the care continuum 
    (including the use of wireless patient technology to improve 
    coordination and management of care and patient adherence to 
    recommendations made by their provider).
    ``(g) Report on Quality Measures.--As a condition for receiving 
payment for health home services provided to an eligible individual 
with chronic conditions, a designated provider shall report to the 
State, in accordance with such requirements as the Secretary shall 
specify, on all applicable measures for determining the quality of such 
services. When appropriate and feasible, a designated provider shall 
use health information technology in providing the State with such 
information.
    ``(h) Definitions.--In this section:
        ``(1) Eligible individual with chronic conditions.--
            ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the term 
        `eligible individual with chronic conditions' means an 
        individual who--
                ``(i) is eligible for medical assistance under the 
            State plan or under a waiver of such plan; and
                ``(ii) has at least--

                    ``(I) 2 chronic conditions;
                    ``(II) 1 chronic condition and is at risk of having 
                a second chronic condition; or
                    ``(III) 1 serious and persistent mental health 
                condition.

            ``(B) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this paragraph 
        shall prevent the Secretary from establishing higher levels as 
        to the number or severity of chronic or mental health 
        conditions for purposes of determining eligibility for receipt 
        of health home services under this section.
        ``(2) Chronic condition.--The term `chronic condition' has the 
    meaning given that term by the Secretary and shall include, but is 
    not limited to, the following:
            ``(A) A mental health condition.
            ``(B) Substance use disorder.
            ``(C) Asthma.
            ``(D) Diabetes.
            ``(E) Heart disease.
            ``(F) Being overweight, as evidenced by having a Body Mass 
        Index (BMI) over 25.
        ``(3) Health home.--The term `health home' means a designated 
    provider (including a provider that operates in coordination with a 
    team of health care professionals) or a health team selected by an 
    eligible individual with chronic conditions to provide health home 
    services.
        ``(4) Health home services.--
            ``(A) In general.--The term `health home services' means 
        comprehensive and timely high-quality services described in 
        subparagraph (B) that are provided by a designated provider, a 
        team of health care professionals operating with such a 
        provider, or a health team.
            ``(B) Services described.--The services described in this 
        subparagraph are--
                ``(i) comprehensive care management;
                ``(ii) care coordination and health promotion;
                ``(iii) comprehensive transitional care, including 
            appropriate follow-up, from inpatient to other settings;
                ``(iv) patient and family support (including authorized 
            representatives);
                ``(v) referral to community and social support 
            services, if relevant; and
                ``(vi) use of health information technology to link 
            services, as feasible and appropriate.
        ``(5) Designated provider.--The term `designated provider' 
    means a physician, clinical practice or clinical group practice, 
    rural clinic, community health center, community mental health 
    center, home health agency, or any other entity or provider 
    (including pediatricians, gynecologists, and obstetricians) that is 
    determined by the State and approved by the Secretary to be 
    qualified to be a health home for eligible individuals with chronic 
    conditions on the basis of documentation evidencing that the 
    physician, practice, or clinic--
            ``(A) has the systems and infrastructure in place to 
        provide health home services; and
            ``(B) satisfies the qualification standards established by 
        the Secretary under subsection (b).
        ``(6) Team of health care professionals.--The term `team of 
    health care professionals' means a team of health professionals (as 
    described in the State plan amendment) that may--
            ``(A) include physicians and other professionals, such as a 
        nurse care coordinator, nutritionist, social worker, behavioral 
        health professional, or any professionals deemed appropriate by 
        the State; and
            ``(B) be free standing, virtual, or based at a hospital, 
        community health center, community mental health center, rural 
        clinic, clinical practice or clinical group practice, academic 
        health center, or any entity deemed appropriate by the State 
        and approved by the Secretary.
        ``(7) Health team.--The term `health team' has the meaning 
    given such term for purposes of section 3502 of the Patient 
    Protection and Affordable Care Act.''.
    (b) Evaluation.--
        (1) Independent evaluation.--
            (A) In general.--The Secretary shall enter into a contract 
        with an independent entity or organization to conduct an 
        evaluation and assessment of the States that have elected the 
        option to provide coordinated care through a health home for 
        Medicaid beneficiaries with chronic conditions under section 
        1945 of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a)) 
        for the purpose of determining the effect of such option on 
        reducing hospital admissions, emergency room visits, and 
        admissions to skilled nursing facilities.
            (B) Evaluation report.--Not later than January 1, 2017, the 
        Secretary shall report to Congress on the evaluation and 
        assessment conducted under subparagraph (A).
        (2) Survey and interim report.--
            (A) In general.--Not later than January 1, 2014, the 
        Secretary of Health and Human Services shall survey States that 
        have elected the option under section 1945 of the Social 
        Security Act (as added by subsection (a)) and report to 
        Congress on the nature, extent, and use of such option, 
        particularly as it pertains to--
                (i) hospital admission rates;
                (ii) chronic disease management;
                (iii) coordination of care for individuals with chronic 
            conditions;
                (iv) assessment of program implementation;
                (v) processes and lessons learned (as described in 
            subparagraph (B));
                (vi) assessment of quality improvements and clinical 
            outcomes under such option; and
                (vii) estimates of cost savings.
            (B)  Implementation reporting.--A State that has elected 
        the option under section 1945 of the Social Security Act (as 
        added by subsection (a)) shall report to the Secretary, as 
        necessary, on processes that have been developed and lessons 
        learned regarding provision of coordinated care through a 
        health home for Medicaid beneficiaries with chronic conditions 
        under such option.

SEC. 2704. DEMONSTRATION PROJECT TO EVALUATE INTEGRATED CARE AROUND A 
              HOSPITALIZATION.

    (a) Authority To Conduct Project.--
        (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in 
    this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a 
    demonstration project under title XIX of the Social Security Act to 
    evaluate the use of bundled payments for the provision of 
    integrated care for a Medicaid beneficiary--
            (A) with respect to an episode of care that includes a 
        hospitalization; and
            (B) for concurrent physicians services provided during a 
        hospitalization.
        (2) Duration.--The demonstration project shall begin on January 
    1, 2012, and shall end on December 31, 2016.
    (b) Requirements.--The demonstration project shall be conducted in 
accordance with the following:
        (1) The demonstration project shall be conducted in up to 8 
    States, determined by the Secretary based on consideration of the 
    potential to lower costs under the Medicaid program while improving 
    care for Medicaid beneficiaries. A State selected to participate in 
    the demonstration project may target the demonstration project to 
    particular categories of beneficiaries, beneficiaries with 
    particular diagnoses, or particular geographic regions of the 
    State, but the Secretary shall insure that, as a whole, the 
    demonstration project is, to the greatest extent possible, 
    representative of the demographic and geographic composition of 
    Medicaid beneficiaries nationally.
        (2) The demonstration project shall focus on conditions where 
    there is evidence of an opportunity for providers of services and 
    suppliers to improve the quality of care furnished to Medicaid 
    beneficiaries while reducing total expenditures under the State 
    Medicaid programs selected to participate, as determined by the 
    Secretary.
        (3) A State selected to participate in the demonstration 
    project shall specify the 1 or more episodes of care the State 
    proposes to address in the project, the services to be included in 
    the bundled payments, and the rationale for the selection of such 
    episodes of care and services. The Secretary may modify the 
    episodes of care as well as the services to be included in the 
    bundled payments prior to or after approving the project. The 
    Secretary may also vary such factors among the different States 
    participating in the demonstration project.
        (4) The Secretary shall ensure that payments made under the 
    demonstration project are adjusted for severity of illness and 
    other characteristics of Medicaid beneficiaries within a category 
    or having a diagnosis targeted as part of the demonstration 
    project. States shall ensure that Medicaid beneficiaries are not 
    liable for any additional cost sharing than if their care had not 
    been subject to payment under the demonstration project.
        (5) Hospitals participating in the demonstration project shall 
    have or establish robust discharge planning programs to ensure that 
    Medicaid beneficiaries requiring post-acute care are appropriately 
    placed in, or have ready access to, post-acute care settings.
        (6) The Secretary and each State selected to participate in the 
    demonstration project shall ensure that the demonstration project 
    does not result in the Medicaid beneficiaries whose care is subject 
    to payment under the demonstration project being provided with less 
    items and services for which medical assistance is provided under 
    the State Medicaid program than the items and services for which 
    medical assistance would have been provided to such beneficiaries 
    under the State Medicaid program in the absence of the 
    demonstration project.
    (c) Waiver of Provisions.--Notwithstanding section 1115(a) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1315(a)), the Secretary may waive such 
provisions of titles XIX, XVIII, and XI of that Act as may be necessary 
to accomplish the goals of the demonstration, ensure beneficiary access 
to acute and post-acute care, and maintain quality of care.
    (d) Evaluation and Report.--
        (1) Data.--Each State selected to participate in the 
    demonstration project under this section shall provide to the 
    Secretary, in such form and manner as the Secretary shall specify, 
    relevant data necessary to monitor outcomes, costs, and quality, 
    and evaluate the rationales for selection of the episodes of care 
    and services specified by States under subsection (b)(3).
        (2) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the conclusion of the 
    demonstration project, the Secretary shall submit a report to 
    Congress on the results of the demonstration project.

SEC. 2705. MEDICAID GLOBAL PAYMENT SYSTEM DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.

    (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
(referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall, in 
coordination with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (as 
established under section 1115A of the Social Security Act, as added by 
section 3021 of this Act), establish the Medicaid Global Payment System 
Demonstration Project under which a participating State shall adjust 
the payments made to an eligible safety net hospital system or network 
from a fee-for-service payment structure to a global capitated payment 
model.
    (b) Duration and Scope.--The demonstration project conducted under 
this section shall operate during a period of fiscal years 2010 through 
2012. The Secretary shall select not more than 5 States to participate 
in the demonstration project.
    (c) Eligible Safety Net Hospital System or Network.--For purposes 
of this section, the term ``eligible safety net hospital system or 
network'' means a large, safety net hospital system or network (as 
defined by the Secretary) that operates within a State selected by the 
Secretary under subsection (b).
    (d) Evaluation.--
        (1) Testing.--The Innovation Center shall test and evaluate the 
    demonstration project conducted under this section to examine any 
    changes in health care quality outcomes and spending by the 
    eligible safety net hospital systems or networks.
        (2) Budget neutrality.--During the testing period under 
    paragraph (1), any budget neutrality requirements under section 
    1115A(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (as so added) shall not be 
    applicable.
        (3) Modification.--During the testing period under paragraph 
    (1), the Secretary may, in the Secretary's discretion, modify or 
    terminate the demonstration project conducted under this section.
    (e) Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of completion 
of the demonstration project under this section, the Secretary shall 
submit to Congress a report containing the results of the evaluation 
and testing conducted under subsection (d), together with 
recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the 
Secretary determines appropriate.
    (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.

SEC. 2706. PEDIATRIC ACCOUNTABLE CARE ORGANIZATION DEMONSTRATION 
              PROJECT.

    (a) Authority To Conduct Demonstration.--
        (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
    (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall establish 
    the Pediatric Accountable Care Organization Demonstration Project 
    to authorize a participating State to allow pediatric medical 
    providers that meet specified requirements to be recognized as an 
    accountable care organization for purposes of receiving incentive 
    payments (as described under subsection (d)), in the same manner as 
    an accountable care organization is recognized and provided with 
    incentive payments under section 1899 of the Social Security Act 
    (as added by section 3022).
        (2) Duration.--The demonstration project shall begin on January 
    1, 2012, and shall end on December 31, 2016.
    (b) Application.--A State that desires to participate in the 
demonstration project under this section shall submit to the Secretary 
an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such 
information as the Secretary may require.
    (c) Requirements.--
        (1) Performance guidelines.--The Secretary, in consultation 
    with the States and pediatric providers, shall establish guidelines 
    to ensure that the quality of care delivered to individuals by a 
    provider recognized as an accountable care organization under this 
    section is not less than the quality of care that would have 
    otherwise been provided to such individuals.
        (2) Savings requirement.--A participating State, in 
    consultation with the Secretary, shall establish an annual minimal 
    level of savings in expenditures for items and services covered 
    under the Medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security 
    Act and the CHIP program under title XXI of such Act that must be 
    reached by an accountable care organization in order for such 
    organization to receive an incentive payment under subsection (d).
        (3) Minimum participation period.--A provider desiring to be 
    recognized as an accountable care organization under the 
    demonstration project shall enter into an agreement with the State 
    to participate in the project for not less than a 3-year period.
    (d) Incentive Payment.--An accountable care organization that meets 
the performance guidelines established by the Secretary under 
subsection (c)(1) and achieves savings greater than the annual minimal 
savings level established by the State under subsection (c)(2) shall 
receive an incentive payment for such year equal to a portion (as 
determined appropriate by the Secretary) of the amount of such excess 
savings. The Secretary may establish an annual cap on incentive 
payments for an accountable care organization.
    (e) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.

SEC. 2707. MEDICAID EMERGENCY PSYCHIATRIC DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.

    (a) Authority To Conduct Demonstration Project.--The Secretary of 
Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the 
``Secretary'') shall establish a demonstration project under which an 
eligible State (as described in subsection (c)) shall provide payment 
under the State Medicaid plan under title XIX of the Social Security 
Act to an institution for mental diseases that is not publicly owned or 
operated and that is subject to the requirements of section 1867 of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395dd) for the provision of medical 
assistance available under such plan to individuals who--
        (1) have attained age 21, but have not attained age 65;
        (2) are eligible for medical assistance under such plan; and
        (3) require such medical assistance to stabilize an emergency 
    medical condition.
    (b) Stabilization Review.--A State shall specify in its application 
described in subsection (c)(1) establish a mechanism for how it will 
ensure that institutions participating in the demonstration will 
determine whether or not such individuals have been stabilized (as 
defined in subsection (h)(5)). This mechanism shall commence before the 
third day of the inpatient stay. States participating in the 
demonstration project may manage the provision of services for the 
stabilization of medical emergency conditions through utilization 
review, authorization, or management practices, or the application of 
medical necessity and appropriateness criteria applicable to behavioral 
health.
    (c) Eligible State Defined.--
        (1) In general.--An eligible State is a State that has made an 
    application and has been selected pursuant to paragraphs (2) and 
    (3).
        (2) Application.--A State seeking to participate in the 
    demonstration project under this section shall submit to the 
    Secretary, at such time and in such format as the Secretary 
    requires, an application that includes such information, 
    provisions, and assurances, as the Secretary may require.
        (3) Selection.--A State shall be determined eligible for the 
    demonstration by the Secretary on a competitive basis among States 
    with applications meeting the requirements of paragraph (1). In 
    selecting State applications for the demonstration project, the 
    Secretary shall seek to achieve an appropriate national balance in 
    the geographic distribution of such projects.
    (d) Length of Demonstration Project.--The demonstration project 
established under this section shall be conducted for a period of 3 
consecutive years.
    (e) Limitations on Federal Funding.--
        (1) Appropriation.--
            (A) In general.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
        otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to carry out this 
        section, $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2011.
            (B) Budget authority.--Subparagraph (A) constitutes budget 
        authority in advance of appropriations Act and represents the 
        obligation of the Federal Government to provide for the payment 
        of the amounts appropriated under that subparagraph.
        (2) 5-year availability.--Funds appropriated under paragraph 
    (1) shall remain available for obligation through December 31, 
    2015.
        (3) Limitation on payments.--In no case may--
            (A) the aggregate amount of payments made by the Secretary 
        to eligible States under this section exceed $75,000,000; or
            (B) payments be provided by the Secretary under this 
        section after December 31, 2015.
        (4) Funds allocated to states.--Funds shall be allocated to 
    eligible States on the basis of criteria, including a State's 
    application and the availability of funds, as determined by the 
    Secretary.
        (5) Payments to states.--The Secretary shall pay to each 
    eligible State, from its allocation under paragraph (4), an amount 
    each quarter equal to the Federal medical assistance percentage of 
    expenditures in the quarter for medical assistance described in 
    subsection (a). As a condition of receiving payment, a State shall 
    collect and report information, as determined necessary by the 
    Secretary, for the purposes of providing Federal oversight and 
    conducting an evaluation under subsection (f)(1).
    (f) Evaluation and Report to Congress.--
        (1) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of 
    the demonstration project in order to determine the impact on the 
    functioning of the health and mental health service system and on 
    individuals enrolled in the Medicaid program and shall include the 
    following:
            (A) An assessment of access to inpatient mental health 
        services under the Medicaid program; average lengths of 
        inpatient stays; and emergency room visits.
            (B) An assessment of discharge planning by participating 
        hospitals.
            (C) An assessment of the impact of the demonstration 
        project on the costs of the full range of mental health 
        services (including inpatient, emergency and ambulatory care).
            (D) An analysis of the percentage of consumers with 
        Medicaid coverage who are admitted to inpatient facilities as a 
        result of the demonstration project as compared to those 
        admitted to these same facilities through other means.
            (E) A recommendation regarding whether the demonstration 
        project should be continued after December 31, 2013, and 
        expanded on a national basis.
        (2) Report.--Not later than December 31, 2013, the Secretary 
    shall submit to Congress and make available to the public a report 
    on the findings of the evaluation under paragraph (1).
    (g) Waiver Authority.--
        (1) In general.--The Secretary shall waive the limitation of 
    subdivision (B) following paragraph (28) of section 1905(a) of the 
    Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) (relating to limitations 
    on payments for care or services for individuals under 65 years of 
    age who are patients in an institution for mental diseases) for 
    purposes of carrying out the demonstration project under this 
    section.
        (2) Limited other waiver authority.--The Secretary may waive 
    other requirements of titles XI and XIX of the Social Security Act 
    (including the requirements of sections 1902(a)(1) (relating to 
    statewideness) and 1902(1)(10)(B) (relating to comparability)) only 
    to extent necessary to carry out the demonstration project under 
    this section.
    (h) Definitions.--In this section:
        (1) Emergency medical condition.--The term ``emergency medical 
    condition'' means, with respect to an individual, an individual who 
    expresses suicidal or homicidal thoughts or gestures, if determined 
    dangerous to self or others.
        (2) Federal medical assistance percentage.--The term ``Federal 
    medical assistance percentage'' has the meaning given that term 
    with respect to a State under section 1905(b) of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)).
        (3) Institution for mental diseases.--The term ``institution 
    for mental diseases'' has the meaning given to that term in section 
    1905(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(i)).
        (4) Medical assistance.--The term ``medical assistance'' has 
    the meaning given that term in section 1905(a) of the Social 
    Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)).
        (5) Stabilized.--The term ``stabilized'' means, with respect to 
    an individual, that the emergency medical condition no longer 
    exists with respect to the individual and the individual is no 
    longer dangerous to self or others.
        (6) State.--The term ``State'' has the meaning given that term 
    for purposes of title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
    1396 et seq.).

 Subtitle J--Improvements to the Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access 
                          Commission (MACPAC)

SEC. 2801. MACPAC ASSESSMENT OF POLICIES AFFECTING ALL MEDICAID 
              BENEFICIARIES.

    (a) In General.--Section 1900 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 
1396) is amended--
        (1) in subsection (b)--
            (A) in paragraph (1)--
                (i) in the paragraph heading, by inserting ``for all 
            states'' before ``and annual''; and
                (ii) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``children's'';
                (iii) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, the 
            Secretary, and States'' after ``Congress'';
                (iv) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``March 1'' and 
            inserting ``March 15''; and
                (v) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``June 1'' and 
            inserting ``June 15'';
            (B) in paragraph (2)--
                (i) in subparagraph (A)--

                    (I) in clause (i)--

                        (aa) by inserting ``the efficient provision 
                    of'' after ``expenditures for''; and
                        (bb) by striking ``hospital, skilled nursing 
                    facility, physician, Federally-qualified health 
                    center, rural health center, and other fees'' and 
                    inserting ``payments to medical, dental, and health 
                    professionals, hospitals, residential and long-term 
                    care providers, providers of home and community 
                    based services, Federally-qualified health centers 
                    and rural health clinics, managed care entities, 
                    and providers of other covered items and 
                    services''; and

                    (II) in clause (iii), by inserting ``(including how 
                such factors and methodologies enable such 
                beneficiaries to obtain the services for which they are 
                eligible, affect provider supply, and affect providers 
                that serve a disproportionate share of low-income and 
                other vulnerable populations)'' after 
                ``beneficiaries'';

                (ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) and (C) as 
            subparagraphs (F) and (H), respectively;
                (iii) by inserting after subparagraph (A), the 
            following:
            ``(B) Eligibility policies.--Medicaid and CHIP eligibility 
        policies, including a determination of the degree to which 
        Federal and State policies provide health care coverage to 
        needy populations.
            ``(C) Enrollment and retention processes.--Medicaid and 
        CHIP enrollment and retention processes, including a 
        determination of the degree to which Federal and State policies 
        encourage the enrollment of individuals who are eligible for 
        such programs and screen out individuals who are ineligible, 
        while minimizing the share of program expenses devoted to such 
        processes.
            ``(D) Coverage policies.--Medicaid and CHIP benefit and 
        coverage policies, including a determination of the degree to 
        which Federal and State policies provide access to the services 
        enrollees require to improve and maintain their health and 
        functional status.
            ``(E) Quality of care.--Medicaid and CHIP policies as they 
        relate to the quality of care provided under those programs, 
        including a determination of the degree to which Federal and 
        State policies achieve their stated goals and interact with 
        similar goals established by other purchasers of health care 
        services.'';
                (iv) by inserting after subparagraph (F) (as 
            redesignated by clause (ii) of this subparagraph), the 
            following:
            ``(G) Interactions with medicare and medicaid.--Consistent 
        with paragraph (11), the interaction of policies under Medicaid 
        and the Medicare program under title XVIII, including with 
        respect to how such interactions affect access to services, 
        payments, and dual eligible individuals.'' and
                (v) in subparagraph (H) (as so redesignated), by 
            inserting ``and preventive, acute, and long-term services 
            and supports'' after ``barriers'';
            (C) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (9) as 
        paragraphs (4) through (10), respectively;
            (D) by inserting after paragraph (2), the following new 
        paragraph:
        ``(3) Recommendations and reports of state-specific data.--
    MACPAC shall--
            ``(A) review national and State-specific Medicaid and CHIP 
        data; and
            ``(B) submit reports and recommendations to Congress, the 
        Secretary, and States based on such reviews.'';
            (E) in paragraph (4), as redesignated by subparagraph (C), 
        by striking ``or any other problems'' and all that follows 
        through the period and inserting ``, as well as other factors 
        that adversely affect, or have the potential to adversely 
        affect, access to care by, or the health care status of, 
        Medicaid and CHIP beneficiaries. MACPAC shall include in the 
        annual report required under paragraph (1)(D) a description of 
        all such areas or problems identified with respect to the 
        period addressed in the report.'';
            (F) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated,--
                (i) in the paragraph heading, by inserting ``and 
            regulations'' after ``reports''; and
                (ii) by striking ``If'' and inserting the following:
            ``(A) Certain secretarial reports.--If''; and
                (iii) in the second sentence, by inserting ``and the 
            Secretary'' after ``appropriate committees of Congress''; 
            and
                (iv) by adding at the end the following:
            ``(B) Regulations.--MACPAC shall review Medicaid and CHIP 
        regulations and may comment through submission of a report to 
        the appropriate committees of Congress and the Secretary, on 
        any such regulations that affect access, quality, or efficiency 
        of health care.'';
            (G) in paragraph (10), as so redesignated, by inserting ``, 
        and shall submit with any recommendations, a report on the 
        Federal and State-specific budget consequences of the 
        recommendations'' before the period; and
            (H) by adding at the end the following:
        ``(11) Consultation and coordination with medpac.--
            ``(A) In general.--MACPAC shall consult with the Medicare 
        Payment Advisory Commission (in this paragraph referred to as 
        `MedPAC') established under section 1805 in carrying out its 
        duties under this section, as appropriate and particularly with 
        respect to the issues specified in paragraph (2) as they relate 
        to those Medicaid beneficiaries who are dually eligible for 
        Medicaid and the Medicare program under title XVIII, adult 
        Medicaid beneficiaries (who are not dually eligible for 
        Medicare), and beneficiaries under Medicare. Responsibility for 
        analysis of and recommendations to change Medicare policy 
        regarding Medicare beneficiaries, including Medicare 
        beneficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicare and 
        Medicaid, shall rest with MedPAC.
            ``(B) Information sharing.--MACPAC and MedPAC shall have 
        access to deliberations and records of the other such entity, 
        respectively, upon the request of the other such entity.
        ``(12) Consultation with states.--MACPAC shall regularly 
    consult with States in carrying out its duties under this section, 
    including with respect to developing processes for carrying out 
    such duties, and shall ensure that input from States is taken into 
    account and represented in MACPAC's recommendations and reports.
        ``(13) Coordinate and consult with the federal coordinated 
    health care office.--MACPAC shall coordinate and consult with the 
    Federal Coordinated Health Care Office established under section 
    2081 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act before 
    making any recommendations regarding dual eligible individuals.
        ``(14) Programmatic oversight vested in the secretary.--
    MACPAC's authority to make recommendations in accordance with this 
    section shall not affect, or be considered to duplicate, the 
    Secretary's authority to carry out Federal responsibilities with 
    respect to Medicaid and CHIP.'';
        (2) in subsection (c)(2)--
            (A) by striking subparagraphs (A) and (B) and inserting the 
        following:
            ``(A) In general.--The membership of MACPAC shall include 
        individuals who have had direct experience as enrollees or 
        parents or caregivers of enrollees in Medicaid or CHIP and 
        individuals with national recognition for their expertise in 
        Federal safety net health programs, health finance and 
        economics, actuarial science, health plans and integrated 
        delivery systems, reimbursement for health care, health 
        information technology, and other providers of health services, 
        public health, and other related fields, who provide a mix of 
        different professions, broad geographic representation, and a 
        balance between urban and rural representation.
            ``(B) Inclusion.--The membership of MACPAC shall include 
        (but not be limited to) physicians, dentists, and other health 
        professionals, employers, third-party payers, and individuals 
        with expertise in the delivery of health services. Such 
        membership shall also include representatives of children, 
        pregnant women, the elderly, individuals with disabilities, 
        caregivers, and dual eligible individuals, current or former 
        representatives of State agencies responsible for administering 
        Medicaid, and current or former representatives of State 
        agencies responsible for administering CHIP.''.
        (3) in subsection (d)(2), by inserting ``and State'' after 
    ``Federal'';
        (4) in subsection (e)(1), in the first sentence, by inserting 
    ``and, as a condition for receiving payments under sections 1903(a) 
    and 2105(a), from any State agency responsible for administering 
    Medicaid or CHIP,'' after ``United States''; and
        (5) in subsection (f)--
            (A) in the subsection heading, by striking ``Authorization 
        of Appropriations'' and inserting ``Funding'';
            (B) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``(other than for fiscal 
        year 2010)'' before ``in the same manner''; and
            (C) by adding at the end the following:
        ``(3) Funding for fiscal year 2010.--
            ``(A) In general.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
        otherwise appropriated, there is appropriated to MACPAC to 
        carry out the provisions of this section for fiscal year 2010, 
        $9,000,000.
            ``(B) Transfer of funds.--Notwithstanding section 
        2104(a)(13), from the amounts appropriated in such section for 
        fiscal year 2010, $2,000,000 is hereby transferred and made 
        available in such fiscal year to MACPAC to carry out the 
        provisions of this section.
        ``(4) Availability.--Amounts made available under paragraphs 
    (2) and (3) to MACPAC to carry out the provisions of this section 
    shall remain available until expended.''.
    (b) Conforming MedPAC Amendments.--Section 1805(b) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395b-6(b)), is amended--
        (1) in paragraph (1)(C), by striking ``March 1 of each year 
    (beginning with 1998)'' and inserting ``March 15'';
        (2) in paragraph (1)(D), by inserting ``, and (beginning with 
    2012) containing an examination of the topics described in 
    paragraph (9), to the extent feasible'' before the period; and
        (3) by adding at the end the following:
        ``(9) Review and annual report on medicaid and commercial 
    trends.--The Commission shall review and report on aggregate trends 
    in spending, utilization, and financial performance under the 
    Medicaid program under title XIX and the private market for health 
    care services with respect to providers for which, on an aggregate 
    national basis, a significant portion of revenue or services is 
    associated with the Medicaid program. Where appropriate, the 
    Commission shall conduct such review in consultation with the 
    Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission established under 
    section 1900 (in this section referred to as `MACPAC').
        ``(10) Coordinate and consult with the federal coordinated 
    health care office.--The Commission shall coordinate and consult 
    with the Federal Coordinated Health Care Office established under 
    section 2081 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 
    before making any recommendations regarding dual eligible 
    individuals.
        ``(11) Interaction of medicaid and medicare.--The Commission 
    shall consult with MACPAC in carrying out its duties under this 
    section, as appropriate. Responsibility for analysis of and 
    recommendations to change Medicare policy regarding Medicare 
    beneficiaries, including Medicare beneficiaries who are dually 
    eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, shall rest with the Commission. 
    Responsibility for analysis of and recommendations to change 
    Medicaid policy regarding Medicaid beneficiaries, including 
    Medicaid beneficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicare and 
    Medicaid, shall rest with MACPAC.''.

    Subtitle K--Protections for American Indians and Alaska Natives

SEC. 2901. SPECIAL RULES RELATING TO INDIANS.

    (a) No Cost-sharing for Indians With Income at or Below 300 Percent 
of Poverty Enrolled in Coverage Through a State Exchange.--For 
provisions prohibiting cost sharing for Indians enrolled in any 
qualified health plan in the individual market through an Exchange, see 
section 1402(d) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
    (b) Payer of Last Resort.--Health programs operated by the Indian 
Health Service, Indian tribes, tribal organizations, and Urban Indian 
organizations (as those terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian 
Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 1603)) shall be the payer of 
last resort for services provided by such Service, tribes, or 
organizations to individuals eligible for services through such 
programs, notwithstanding any Federal, State, or local law to the 
contrary.
    (c) Facilitating Enrollment of Indians Under the Express Lane 
Option.--Section 1902(e)(13)(F)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 1396a(e)(13)(F)(ii)) is amended--
        (1) in the clause heading, by inserting ``and indian tribes and 
    tribal organizations'' after ``agencies''; and
        (2) by adding at the end the following:

                    ``(IV) The Indian Health Service, an Indian Tribe, 
                Tribal Organization, or Urban Indian Organization (as 
                defined in section 1139(c)).''.

    (d) Technical Corrections.--Section 1139(c) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-9(c)) is amended by striking ``In this section'' 
and inserting ``For purposes of this section, title XIX, and title 
XXI''.

SEC. 2902. ELIMINATION OF SUNSET FOR REIMBURSEMENT FOR ALL MEDICARE 
              PART B SERVICES FURNISHED BY CERTAIN INDIAN HOSPITALS AND 
              CLINICS.

    (a) Reimbursement for All Medicare Part B Services Furnished by 
Certain Indian Hospitals and Clinics.--Section 1880(e)(1)(A) of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395qq(e)(1)(A)) is amended by striking 
``during the 5-year period beginning on'' and inserting ``on or 
after''.
    (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to items or services furnished on or after January 1, 2010.

             Subtitle L--Maternal and Child Health Services

SEC. 2951. MATERNAL, INFANT, AND EARLY CHILDHOOD HOME VISITING 
              PROGRAMS.

    Title V of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 701 et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 511. MATERNAL, INFANT, AND EARLY CHILDHOOD HOME VISITING 
              PROGRAMS.

    ``(a) Purposes.--The purposes of this section are--
        ``(1) to strengthen and improve the programs and activities 
    carried out under this title;
        ``(2) to improve coordination of services for at risk 
    communities; and
        ``(3) to identify and provide comprehensive services to improve 
    outcomes for families who reside in at risk communities.
    ``(b) Requirement for All States To Assess Statewide Needs and 
Identify at Risk Communities.--
        ``(1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
    enactment of this section, each State shall, as a condition of 
    receiving payments from an allotment for the State under section 
    502 for fiscal year 2011, conduct a statewide needs assessment 
    (which shall be separate from the statewide needs assessment 
    required under section 505(a)) that identifies--
            ``(A) communities with concentrations of--
                ``(i) premature birth, low-birth weight infants, and 
            infant mortality, including infant death due to neglect, or 
            other indicators of at-risk prenatal, maternal, newborn, or 
            child health;
                ``(ii) poverty;
                ``(iii) crime;
                ``(iv) domestic violence;
                ``(v) high rates of high-school drop-outs;
                ``(vi) substance abuse;
                ``(vii) unemployment; or
                ``(viii) child maltreatment;
            ``(B) the quality and capacity of existing programs or 
        initiatives for early childhood home visitation in the State 
        including--
                ``(i) the number and types of individuals and families 
            who are receiving services under such programs or 
            initiatives;
                ``(ii) the gaps in early childhood home visitation in 
            the State; and
                ``(iii) the extent to which such programs or 
            initiatives are meeting the needs of eligible families 
            described in subsection (k)(2); and
            ``(C) the State's capacity for providing substance abuse 
        treatment and counseling services to individuals and families 
        in need of such treatment or services.
        ``(2) Coordination with other assessments.--In conducting the 
    statewide needs assessment required under paragraph (1), the State 
    shall coordinate with, and take into account, other appropriate 
    needs assessments conducted by the State, as determined by the 
    Secretary, including the needs assessment required under section 
    505(a) (both the most recently completed assessment and any such 
    assessment in progress), the communitywide strategic planning and 
    needs assessments conducted in accordance with section 640(g)(1)(C) 
    of the Head Start Act, and the inventory of current unmet needs and 
    current community-based and prevention-focused programs and 
    activities to prevent child abuse and neglect, and other family 
    resource services operating in the State required under section 
    205(3) of the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act.
        ``(3) Submission to the secretary.--Each State shall submit to 
    the Secretary, in such form and manner as the Secretary shall 
    require--
            ``(A) the results of the statewide needs assessment 
        required under paragraph (1); and
            ``(B) a description of how the State intends to address 
        needs identified by the assessment, particularly with respect 
        to communities identified under paragraph (1)(A), which may 
        include applying for a grant to conduct an early childhood home 
        visitation program in accordance with the requirements of this 
        section.
    ``(c) Grants for Early Childhood Home Visitation Programs.--
        ``(1) Authority to make grants.--In addition to any other 
    payments made under this title to a State, the Secretary shall make 
    grants to eligible entities to enable the entities to deliver 
    services under early childhood home visitation programs that 
    satisfy the requirements of subsection (d) to eligible families in 
    order to promote improvements in maternal and prenatal health, 
    infant health, child health and development, parenting related to 
    child development outcomes, school readiness, and the socioeconomic 
    status of such families, and reductions in child abuse, neglect, 
    and injuries.
        ``(2) Authority to use initial grant funds for planning or 
    implementation.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under 
    paragraph (1) may use a portion of the funds made available to the 
    entity during the first 6 months of the period for which the grant 
    is made for planning or implementation activities to assist with 
    the establishment of early childhood home visitation programs that 
    satisfy the requirements of subsection (d).
        ``(3) Grant duration.--The Secretary shall determine the period 
    of years for which a grant is made to an eligible entity under 
    paragraph (1).
        ``(4) Technical assistance.--The Secretary shall provide an 
    eligible entity that receives a grant under paragraph (1) with 
    technical assistance in administering programs or activities 
    conducted in whole or in part with grant funds.
    ``(d) Requirements.--The requirements of this subsection for an 
early childhood home visitation program conducted with a grant made 
under this section are as follows:
        ``(1) Quantifiable, measurable improvement in benchmark 
    areas.--
            ``(A) In general.--The eligible entity establishes, subject 
        to the approval of the Secretary, quantifiable, measurable 3- 
        and 5-year benchmarks for demonstrating that the program 
        results in improvements for the eligible families participating 
        in the program in each of the following areas:
                ``(i) Improved maternal and newborn health.
                ``(ii) Prevention of child injuries, child abuse, 
            neglect, or maltreatment, and reduction of emergency 
            department visits.
                ``(iii) Improvement in school readiness and 
            achievement.
                ``(iv) Reduction in crime or domestic violence.
                ``(v) Improvements in family economic self-sufficiency.
                ``(vi) Improvements in the coordination and referrals 
            for other community resources and supports.
            ``(B) Demonstration of improvements after 3 years.--
                ``(i) Report to the secretary.--Not later than 30 days 
            after the end of the 3rd year in which the eligible entity 
            conducts the program, the entity submits to the Secretary a 
            report demonstrating improvement in at least 4 of the areas 
            specified in subparagraph (A).
                ``(ii) Corrective action plan.--If the report submitted 
            by the eligible entity under clause (i) fails to 
            demonstrate improvement in at least 4 of the areas 
            specified in subparagraph (A), the entity shall develop and 
            implement a plan to improve outcomes in each of the areas 
            specified in subparagraph (A), subject to approval by the 
            Secretary. The plan shall include provisions for the 
            Secretary to monitor implementation of the plan and conduct 
            continued oversight of the program, including through 
            submission by the entity of regular reports to the 
            Secretary.
                ``(iii) Technical assistance.--

                    ``(I) In general.--The Secretary shall provide an 
                eligible entity required to develop and implement an 
                improvement plan under clause (ii) with technical 
                assistance to develop and implement the plan. The 
                Secretary may provide the technical assistance directly 
                or through grants, contracts, or cooperative 
                agreements.
                    ``(II) Advisory panel.--The Secretary shall 
                establish an advisory panel for purposes of obtaining 
                recommendations regarding the technical assistance 
                provided to entities in accordance with subclause (I).

                ``(iv) No improvement or failure to submit report.--If 
            the Secretary determines after a period of time specified 
            by the Secretary that an eligible entity implementing an 
            improvement plan under clause (ii) has failed to 
            demonstrate any improvement in the areas specified in 
            subparagraph (A), or if the Secretary determines that an 
            eligible entity has failed to submit the report required 
            under clause (i), the Secretary shall terminate the 
            entity's grant and may include any unexpended grant funds 
            in grants made to nonprofit organizations under subsection 
            (h)(2)(B).
            ``(C) Final report.--Not later than December 31, 2015, the 
        eligible entity shall submit a report to the Secretary 
        demonstrating improvements (if any) in each of the areas 
        specified in subparagraph (A).
        ``(2) Improvements in outcomes for individual families.--
            ``(A) In general.--The program is designed, with respect to 
        an eligible family participating in the program, to result in 
        the participant outcomes described in subparagraph (B) that the 
        eligible entity identifies on the basis of an individualized 
        assessment of the family, are relevant for that family.
            ``(B) Participant outcomes.--The participant outcomes 
        described in this subparagraph are the following:
                ``(i) Improvements in prenatal, maternal, and newborn 
            health, including improved pregnancy outcomes
                ``(ii) Improvements in child health and development, 
            including the prevention of child injuries and maltreatment 
            and improvements in cognitive, language, social-emotional, 
            and physical developmental indicators.
                ``(iii) Improvements in parenting skills.
                ``(iv) Improvements in school readiness and child 
            academic achievement.
                ``(v) Reductions in crime or domestic violence.
                ``(vi) Improvements in family economic self-
            sufficiency.
                ``(vii) Improvements in the coordination of referrals 
            for, and the provision of, other community resources and 
            supports for eligible families, consistent with State child 
            welfare agency training.
        ``(3) Core components.--The program includes the following core 
    components:
            ``(A) Service delivery model or models.--
                ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the program 
            is conducted using 1 or more of the service delivery models 
            described in item (aa) or (bb) of subclause (I) or in 
            subclause (II) selected by the eligible entity:

                    ``(I) The model conforms to a clear consistent home 
                visitation model that has been in existence for at 
                least 3 years and is research-based, grounded in 
                relevant empirically-based knowledge, linked to program 
                determined outcomes, associated with a national 
                organization or institution of higher education that 
                has comprehensive home visitation program standards 
                that ensure high quality service delivery and 
                continuous program quality improvement, and has 
                demonstrated significant, (and in the case of the 
                service delivery model described in item (aa), 
                sustained) positive outcomes, as described in the 
                benchmark areas specified in paragraph (1)(A) and the 
                participant outcomes described in paragraph (2)(B), 
                when evaluated using well-designed and rigorous--

                        ``(aa) randomized controlled research designs, 
                    and the evaluation results have been published in a 
                    peer-reviewed journal; or
                        ``(bb) quasi-experimental research designs.

                    ``(II) The model conforms to a promising and new 
                approach to achieving the benchmark areas specified in 
                paragraph (1)(A) and the participant outcomes described 
                in paragraph (2)(B), has been developed or identified 
                by a national organization or institution of higher 
                education, and will be evaluated through well-designed 
                and rigorous process.

                ``(ii) Majority of grant funds used for evidence-based 
            models.--An eligible entity shall use not more than 25 
            percent of the amount of the grant paid to the entity for a 
            fiscal year for purposes of conducting a program using the 
            service delivery model described in clause (i)(II).
                ``(iii) Criteria for evidence of effectiveness of 
            models.--The Secretary shall establish criteria for 
            evidence of effectiveness of the service delivery models 
            and shall ensure that the process for establishing the 
            criteria is transparent and provides the opportunity for 
            public comment.
            ``(B) Additional requirements.--
                ``(i) The program adheres to a clear, consistent model 
            that satisfies the requirements of being grounded in 
            empirically-based knowledge related to home visiting and 
            linked to the benchmark areas specified in paragraph (1)(A) 
            and the participant outcomes described in paragraph (2)(B) 
            related to the purposes of the program.
                ``(ii) The program employs well-trained and competent 
            staff, as demonstrated by education or training, such as 
            nurses, social workers, educators, child development 
            specialists, or other well-trained and competent staff, and 
            provides ongoing and specific training on the model being 
            delivered.
                ``(iii) The program maintains high quality supervision 
            to establish home visitor competencies.
                ``(iv) The program demonstrates strong organizational 
            capacity to implement the activities involved.
                ``(v) The program establishes appropriate linkages and 
            referral networks to other community resources and supports 
            for eligible families.
                ``(vi) The program monitors the fidelity of program 
            implementation to ensure that services are delivered 
            pursuant to the specified model.
        ``(4) Priority for serving high-risk populations.--The eligible 
    entity gives priority to providing services under the program to 
    the following:
            ``(A) Eligible families who reside in communities in need 
        of such services, as identified in the statewide needs 
        assessment required under subsection (b)(1)(A).
            ``(B) Low-income eligible families.
            ``(C) Eligible families who are pregnant women who have not 
        attained age 21.
            ``(D) Eligible families that have a history of child abuse 
        or neglect or have had interactions with child welfare 
        services.
            ``(E) Eligible families that have a history of substance 
        abuse or need substance abuse treatment.
            ``(F) Eligible families that have users of tobacco products 
        in the home.
            ``(G) Eligible families that are or have children with low 
        student achievement.
            ``(H) Eligible families with children with developmental 
        delays or disabilities.
            ``(I) Eligible families who, or that include individuals 
        who, are serving or formerly served in the Armed Forces, 
        including such families that have members of the Armed Forces 
        who have had multiple deployments outside of the United States.
    ``(e) Application Requirements.--An eligible entity desiring a 
grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary 
for approval, in such manner as the Secretary may require, that 
includes the following:
        ``(1) A description of the populations to be served by the 
    entity, including specific information regarding how the entity 
    will serve high risk populations described in subsection (d)(4).
        ``(2) An assurance that the entity will give priority to 
    serving low-income eligible families and eligible families who 
    reside in at risk communities identified in the statewide needs 
    assessment required under subsection (b)(1)(A).
        ``(3) The service delivery model or models described in 
    subsection (d)(3)(A) that the entity will use under the program and 
    the basis for the selection of the model or models.
        ``(4) A statement identifying how the selection of the 
    populations to be served and the service delivery model or models 
    that the entity will use under the program for such populations is 
    consistent with the results of the statewide needs assessment 
    conducted under subsection (b).
        ``(5) The quantifiable, measurable benchmarks established by 
    the State to demonstrate that the program contributes to 
    improvements in the areas specified in subsection (d)(1)(A).
        ``(6) An assurance that the entity will obtain and submit 
    documentation or other appropriate evidence from the organization 
    or entity that developed the service delivery model or models used 
    under the program to verify that the program is implemented and 
    services are delivered according to the model specifications.
        ``(7) Assurances that the entity will establish procedures to 
    ensure that--
            ``(A) the participation of each eligible family in the 
        program is voluntary; and
            ``(B) services are provided to an eligible family in 
        accordance with the individual assessment for that family.
        ``(8) Assurances that the entity will--
            ``(A) submit annual reports to the Secretary regarding the 
        program and activities carried out under the program that 
        include such information and data as the Secretary shall 
        require; and
            ``(B) participate in, and cooperate with, data and 
        information collection necessary for the evaluation required 
        under subsection (g)(2) and other research and evaluation 
        activities carried out under subsection (h)(3).
        ``(9) A description of other State programs that include home 
    visitation services, including, if applicable to the State, other 
    programs carried out under this title with funds made available 
    from allotments under section 502(c), programs funded under title 
    IV, title II of the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act 
    (relating to community-based grants for the prevention of child 
    abuse and neglect), and section 645A of the Head Start Act 
    (relating to Early Head Start programs).
        ``(10) Other information as required by the Secretary.
    ``(f) Maintenance of Effort.--Funds provided to an eligible entity 
receiving a grant under this section shall supplement, and not 
supplant, funds from other sources for early childhood home visitation 
programs or initiatives.
    ``(g) Evaluation.--
        ``(1) Independent, expert advisory panel.--The Secretary, in 
    accordance with subsection (h)(1)(A), shall appoint an independent 
    advisory panel consisting of experts in program evaluation and 
    research, education, and early childhood development--
            ``(A) to review, and make recommendations on, the design 
        and plan for the evaluation required under paragraph (2) within 
        1 year after the date of enactment of this section;
            ``(B) to maintain and advise the Secretary regarding the 
        progress of the evaluation; and
            ``(C) to comment, if the panel so desires, on the report 
        submitted under paragraph (3).
        ``(2) Authority to conduct evaluation.--On the basis of the 
    recommendations of the advisory panel under paragraph (1), the 
    Secretary shall, by grant, contract, or interagency agreement, 
    conduct an evaluation of the statewide needs assessments submitted 
    under subsection (b) and the grants made under subsections (c) and 
    (h)(3)(B). The evaluation shall include--
            ``(A) an analysis, on a State-by-State basis, of the 
        results of such assessments, including indicators of maternal 
        and prenatal health and infant health and mortality, and State 
        actions in response to the assessments; and
            ``(B) an assessment of--
                ``(i) the effect of early childhood home visitation 
            programs on child and parent outcomes, including with 
            respect to each of the benchmark areas specified in 
            subsection (d)(1)(A) and the participant outcomes described 
            in subsection (d)(2)(B);
                ``(ii) the effectiveness of such programs on different 
            populations, including the extent to which the ability of 
            programs to improve participant outcomes varies across 
            programs and populations; and
                ``(iii) the potential for the activities conducted 
            under such programs, if scaled broadly, to improve health 
            care practices, eliminate health disparities, and improve 
            health care system quality, efficiencies, and reduce costs.
        ``(3) Report.--Not later than March 31, 2015, the Secretary 
    shall submit a report to Congress on the results of the evaluation 
    conducted under paragraph (2) and shall make the report publicly 
    available.
    ``(h) Other Provisions.--
        ``(1) Intra-agency collaboration.--The Secretary shall ensure 
    that the Maternal and Child Health Bureau and the Administration 
    for Children and Families collaborate with respect to carrying out 
    this section, including with respect to--
            ``(A) reviewing and analyzing the statewide needs 
        assessments required under subsection (b), the awarding and 
        oversight of grants awarded under this section, the 
        establishment of the advisory panels required under subsections 
        (d)(1)(B)(iii)(II) and (g)(1), and the evaluation and report 
        required under subsection (g); and
            ``(B) consulting with other Federal agencies with 
        responsibility for administering or evaluating programs that 
        serve eligible families to coordinate and collaborate with 
        respect to research related to such programs and families, 
        including the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning 
        and Evaluation of the Department of Health and Human Services, 
        the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National 
        Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the National 
        Institutes of Health, the Office of Juvenile Justice and 
        Delinquency Prevention of the Department of Justice, and the 
        Institute of Education Sciences of the Department of Education.
        ``(2) Grants to eligible entities that are not states.--
            ``(A) Indian tribes, tribal organizations, or urban indian 
        organizations.--The Secretary shall specify requirements for 
        eligible entities that are Indian Tribes (or a consortium of 
        Indian Tribes), Tribal Organizations, or Urban Indian 
        Organizations to apply for and conduct an early childhood home 
        visitation program with a grant under this section. Such 
        requirements shall, to the greatest extent practicable, be 
        consistent with the requirements applicable to eligible 
        entities that are States and shall require an Indian Tribe (or 
        consortium), Tribal Organization, or Urban Indian Organization 
        to--
                ``(i) conduct a needs assessment similar to the 
            assessment required for all States under subsection (b); 
            and
                ``(ii) establish quantifiable, measurable 3- and 5-year 
            benchmarks consistent with subsection (d)(1)(A).
            ``(B) Nonprofit organizations.--If, as of the beginning of 
        fiscal year 2012, a State has not applied or been approved for 
        a grant under this section, the Secretary may use amounts 
        appropriated under paragraph (1) of subsection (j) that are 
        available for expenditure under paragraph (3) of that 
        subsection to make a grant to an eligible entity that is a 
        nonprofit organization described in subsection (k)(1)(B) to 
        conduct an early childhood home visitation program in the 
        State. The Secretary shall specify the requirements for such an 
        organization to apply for and conduct the program which shall, 
        to the greatest extent practicable, be consistent with the 
        requirements applicable to eligible entities that are States 
        and shall require the organization to--
                ``(i) carry out the program based on the needs 
            assessment conducted by the State under subsection (b); and
                ``(ii) establish quantifiable, measurable 3- and 5-year 
            benchmarks consistent with subsection (d)(1)(A).
        ``(3) Research and other evaluation activities.--
            ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a 
        continuous program of research and evaluation activities in 
        order to increase knowledge about the implementation and 
        effectiveness of home visiting programs, using random 
        assignment designs to the maximum extent feasible. The 
        Secretary may carry out such activities directly, or through 
        grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts.
            ``(B) Requirements.--The Secretary shall ensure that--
                ``(i) evaluation of a specific program or project is 
            conducted by persons or individuals not directly involved 
            in the operation of such program or project; and
                ``(ii) the conduct of research and evaluation 
            activities includes consultation with independent 
            researchers, State officials, and developers and providers 
            of home visiting programs on topics including research 
            design and administrative data matching.
        ``(4) Report and recommendation.--Not later than December 31, 
    2015, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress regarding the 
    programs conducted with grants under this section. The report 
    required under this paragraph shall include--
            ``(A) information regarding the extent to which eligible 
        entities receiving grants under this section demonstrated 
        improvements in each of the areas specified in subsection 
        (d)(1)(A);
            ``(B) information regarding any technical assistance 
        provided under subsection (d)(1)(B)(iii)(I), including the type 
        of any such assistance provided; and
            ``(C) recommendations for such legislative or 
        administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
    ``(i) Application of Other Provisions of Title.--
        ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
    other provisions of this title shall not apply to a grant made 
    under this section.
        ``(2) Exceptions.--The following provisions of this title shall 
    apply to a grant made under this section to the same extent and in 
    the same manner as such provisions apply to allotments made under 
    section 502(c):
            ``(A) Section 504(b)(6) (relating to prohibition on 
        payments to excluded individuals and entities).
            ``(B) Section 504(c) (relating to the use of funds for the 
        purchase of technical assistance).
            ``(C) Section 504(d) (relating to a limitation on 
        administrative expenditures).
            ``(D) Section 506 (relating to reports and audits), but 
        only to the extent determined by the Secretary to be 
        appropriate for grants made under this section.
            ``(E) Section 507 (relating to penalties for false 
        statements).
            ``(F) Section 508 (relating to nondiscrimination).
            ``(G) Section 509(a) (relating to the administration of the 
        grant program).
    ``(j) Appropriations.--
        ``(1) In general.--Out of any funds in the Treasury not 
    otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Secretary to 
    carry out this section--
            ``(A) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2010;
            ``(B) $250,000,000 for fiscal year 2011;
            ``(C) $350,000,000 for fiscal year 2012;
            ``(D) $400,000,000 for fiscal year 2013; and
            ``(E) $400,000,000 for fiscal year 2014.
        ``(2) Reservations.--Of the amount appropriated under this 
    subsection for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve--
            ``(A) 3 percent of such amount for purposes of making 
        grants to eligible entities that are Indian Tribes (or a 
        consortium of Indian Tribes), Tribal Organizations, or Urban 
        Indian Organizations; and
            ``(B) 3 percent of such amount for purposes of carrying out 
        subsections (d)(1)(B)(iii), (g), and (h)(3).
        ``(3) Availability.--Funds made available to an eligible entity 
    under this section for a fiscal year shall remain available for 
    expenditure by the eligible entity through the end of the second 
    succeeding fiscal year after award. Any funds that are not expended 
    by the eligible entity during the period in which the funds are 
    available under the preceding sentence may be used for grants to 
    nonprofit organizations under subsection (h)(2)(B).
    ``(k) Definitions.--In this section:
        ``(1) Eligible entity.--
            ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible entity' means a 
        State, an Indian Tribe, Tribal Organization, or Urban Indian 
        Organization, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the 
        Northern Mariana Islands, and American Samoa.
            ``(B) Nonprofit organizations.--Only for purposes of 
        awarding grants under subsection (h)(2)(B), such term shall 
        include a nonprofit organization with an established record of 
        providing early childhood home visitation programs or 
        initiatives in a State or several States.
        ``(2) Eligible family.--The term `eligible family' means--
            ``(A) a woman who is pregnant, and the father of the child 
        if the father is available; or
            ``(B) a parent or primary caregiver of a child, including 
        grandparents or other relatives of the child, and foster 
        parents, who are serving as the child's primary caregiver from 
        birth to kindergarten entry, and including a noncustodial 
        parent who has an ongoing relationship with, and at times 
        provides physical care for, the child.
        ``(3) Indian tribe; tribal organization.--The terms `Indian 
    Tribe' and `Tribal Organization', and `Urban Indian Organization' 
    have the meanings given such terms in section 4 of the Indian 
    Health Care Improvement Act.''.

SEC. 2952. SUPPORT, EDUCATION, AND RESEARCH FOR POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION.

    (a) Research on Postpartum Conditions.--
        (1) Expansion and intensification of activities.--The Secretary 
    of Health and Human Services (in this subsection and subsection (c) 
    referred to as the ``Secretary'') is encouraged to continue 
    activities on postpartum depression or postpartum psychosis (in 
    this subsection and subsection (c) referred to as ``postpartum 
    conditions''), including research to expand the understanding of 
    the causes of, and treatments for, postpartum conditions. 
    Activities under this paragraph shall include conducting and 
    supporting the following:
            (A) Basic research concerning the etiology and causes of 
        the conditions.
            (B) Epidemiological studies to address the frequency and 
        natural history of the conditions and the differences among 
        racial and ethnic groups with respect to the conditions.
            (C) The development of improved screening and diagnostic 
        techniques.
            (D) Clinical research for the development and evaluation of 
        new treatments.
            (E) Information and education programs for health care 
        professionals and the public, which may include a coordinated 
        national campaign to increase the awareness and knowledge of 
        postpartum conditions. Activities under such a national 
        campaign may--
                (i) include public service announcements through 
            television, radio, and other means; and
                (ii) focus on--

                    (I) raising awareness about screening;
                    (II) educating new mothers and their families about 
                postpartum conditions to promote earlier diagnosis and 
                treatment; and
                    (III) ensuring that such education includes 
                complete information concerning postpartum conditions, 
                including its symptoms, methods of coping with the 
                illness, and treatment resources.

        (2) Sense of congress regarding longitudinal study of relative 
    mental health consequences for women of resolving a pregnancy.--
            (A) Sense of congress.--It is the sense of Congress that 
        the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health may 
        conduct a nationally representative longitudinal study (during 
        the period of fiscal years 2010 through 2019) of the relative 
        mental health consequences for women of resolving a pregnancy 
        (intended and unintended) in various ways, including carrying 
        the pregnancy to term and parenting the child, carrying the 
        pregnancy to term and placing the child for adoption, 
        miscarriage, and having an abortion. This study may assess the 
        incidence, timing, magnitude, and duration of the immediate and 
        long-term mental health consequences (positive or negative) of 
        these pregnancy outcomes.
            (B) Report.--Subject to the completion of the study under 
        subsection (a), beginning not later than 5 years after the date 
        of the enactment of this Act, and periodically thereafter for 
        the duration of the study, such Director may prepare and submit 
        to the Congress reports on the findings of the study.
    (b) Grants To Provide Services to Individuals With a Postpartum 
Condition and Their Families.--Title V of the Social Security Act (42 
U.S.C. 701 et seq.), as amended by section 2951, is amended by adding 
at the end the following new section:

``SEC. 512. SERVICES TO INDIVIDUALS WITH A POSTPARTUM CONDITION AND 
              THEIR FAMILIES.

    ``(a) In General.--In addition to any other payments made under 
this title to a State, the Secretary may make grants to eligible 
entities for projects for the establishment, operation, and 
coordination of effective and cost-efficient systems for the delivery 
of essential services to individuals with or at risk for postpartum 
conditions and their families.
    ``(b) Certain Activities.--To the extent practicable and 
appropriate, the Secretary shall ensure that projects funded under 
subsection (a) provide education and services with respect to the 
diagnosis and management of postpartum conditions for individuals with 
or at risk for postpartum conditions and their families. The Secretary 
may allow such projects to include the following:
        ``(1) Delivering or enhancing outpatient and home-based health 
    and support services, including case management and comprehensive 
    treatment services.
        ``(2) Delivering or enhancing inpatient care management 
    services that ensure the well-being of the mother and family and 
    the future development of the infant.
        ``(3) Improving the quality, availability, and organization of 
    health care and support services (including transportation 
    services, attendant care, homemaker services, day or respite care, 
    and providing counseling on financial assistance and insurance).
        ``(4) Providing education about postpartum conditions to 
    promote earlier diagnosis and treatment. Such education may 
    include--
            ``(A) providing complete information on postpartum 
        conditions, symptoms, methods of coping with the illness, and 
        treatment resources; and
            ``(B) in the case of a grantee that is a State, hospital, 
        or birthing facility--
                ``(i) providing education to new mothers and fathers, 
            and other family members as appropriate, concerning 
            postpartum conditions before new mothers leave the health 
            facility; and
                ``(ii) ensuring that training programs regarding such 
            education are carried out at the health facility.
    ``(c) Integration With Other Programs.--To the extent practicable 
and appropriate, the Secretary may integrate the grant program under 
this section with other grant programs carried out by the Secretary, 
including the program under section 330 of the Public Health Service 
Act.
    ``(d) Requirements.--The Secretary shall establish requirements for 
grants made under this section that include a limit on the amount of 
grants funds that may be used for administration, accounting, 
reporting, or program oversight functions and a requirement for each 
eligible entity that receives a grant to submit, for each grant period, 
a report to the Secretary that describes how grant funds were used 
during such period.
    ``(e) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide technical 
assistance to entities seeking a grant under this section in order to 
assist such entities in complying with the requirements of this 
section.
    ``(f) Application of Other Provisions of Title.--
        ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
    other provisions of this title shall not apply to a grant made 
    under this section.
        ``(2) Exceptions.--The following provisions of this title shall 
    apply to a grant made under this section to the same extent and in 
    the same manner as such provisions apply to allotments made under 
    section 502(c):
            ``(A) Section 504(b)(6) (relating to prohibition on 
        payments to excluded individuals and entities).
            ``(B) Section 504(c) (relating to the use of funds for the 
        purchase of technical assistance).
            ``(C) Section 504(d) (relating to a limitation on 
        administrative expenditures).
            ``(D) Section 506 (relating to reports and audits), but 
        only to the extent determined by the Secretary to be 
        appropriate for grants made under this section.
            ``(E) Section 507 (relating to penalties for false 
        statements).
            ``(F) Section 508 (relating to nondiscrimination).
            ``(G) Section 509(a) (relating to the administration of the 
        grant program).
    ``(g) Definitions.--In this section:
        ``(1) The term `eligible entity'--
            ``(A) means a public or nonprofit private entity; and
            ``(B) includes a State or local government, public-private 
        partnership, recipient of a grant under section 330H of the 
        Public Health Service Act (relating to the Healthy Start 
        Initiative), public or nonprofit private hospital, community-
        based organization, hospice, ambulatory care facility, 
        community health center, migrant health center, public housing 
        primary care center, or homeless health center.
        ``(2) The term `postpartum condition' means postpartum 
    depression or postpartum psychosis.''.
    (c) General Provisions.--
        (1) Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this section 
    and the amendment made by subsection (b), there are authorized to 
    be appropriated, in addition to such other sums as may be available 
    for such purpose--
            (A) $3,000,000 for fiscal year 2010; and
            (B) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2011 and 
        2012.
        (2) Report by the secretary.--
            (A) Study.--The Secretary shall conduct a study on the 
        benefits of screening for postpartum conditions.
            (B) Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the 
        enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete the study 
        required by subparagraph (A) and submit a report to the 
        Congress on the results of such study.

SEC. 2953. PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY EDUCATION.

    Title V of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 701 et seq.), as 
amended by sections 2951 and 2952(c), is amended by adding at the end 
the following:

``SEC. 513. PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY EDUCATION.

    ``(a) Allotments to States.--
        ``(1) Amount.--
            ``(A) In general.--For the purpose described in subsection 
        (b), subject to the succeeding provisions of this section, for 
        each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014, the Secretary shall 
        allot to each State an amount equal to the product of--
                ``(i) the amount appropriated under subsection (f) for 
            the fiscal year and available for allotments to States 
            after the application of subsection (c); and
                ``(ii) the State youth population percentage determined 
            under paragraph (2).
            ``(B) Minimum allotment.--
                ``(i) In general.--Each State allotment under this 
            paragraph for a fiscal year shall be at least $250,000.
                ``(ii) Pro rata adjustments.--The Secretary shall 
            adjust on a pro rata basis the amount of the State 
            allotments determined under this paragraph for a fiscal 
            year to the extent necessary to comply with clause (i).
            ``(C) Application required to access allotments.--
                ``(i) In general.--A State shall not be paid from its 
            allotment for a fiscal year unless the State submits an 
            application to the Secretary for the fiscal year and the 
            Secretary approves the application (or requires changes to 
            the application that the State satisfies) and meets such 
            additional requirements as the Secretary may specify.
                ``(ii) Requirements.--The State application shall 
            contain an assurance that the State has complied with the 
            requirements of this section in preparing and submitting 
            the application and shall include the following as well as 
            such additional information as the Secretary may require:

                    ``(I) Based on data from the Centers for Disease 
                Control and Prevention National Center for Health 
                Statistics, the most recent pregnancy rates for the 
                State for youth ages 10 to 14 and youth ages 15 to 19 
                for which data are available, the most recent birth 
                rates for such youth populations in the State for which 
                data are available, and trends in those rates for the 
                most recently preceding 5-year period for which such 
                data are available.
                    ``(II) State-established goals for reducing the 
                pregnancy rates and birth rates for such youth 
                populations.
                    ``(III) A description of the State's plan for using 
                the State allotments provided under this section to 
                achieve such goals, especially among youth populations 
                that are the most high-risk or vulnerable for 
                pregnancies or otherwise have special circumstances, 
                including youth in foster care, homeless youth, youth 
                with HIV/AIDS, pregnant youth who are under 21 years of 
                age, mothers who are under 21 years of age, and youth 
                residing in areas with high birth rates for youth.

        ``(2) State youth population percentage.--
            ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A)(ii), 
        the State youth population percentage is, with respect to a 
        State, the proportion (expressed as a percentage) of--
                ``(i) the number of individuals who have attained age 
            10 but not attained age 20 in the State; to
                ``(ii) the number of such individuals in all States.
            ``(B) Determination of number of youth.--The number of 
        individuals described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph 
        (A) in a State shall be determined on the basis of the most 
        recent Bureau of the Census data.
        ``(3) Availability of state allotments.--Subject to paragraph 
    (4)(A), amounts allotted to a State pursuant to this subsection for 
    a fiscal year shall remain available for expenditure by the State 
    through the end of the second succeeding fiscal year.
        ``(4) Authority to award grants from state allotments to local 
    organizations and entities in nonparticipating states.--
            ``(A) Grants from unexpended allotments.--If a State does 
        not submit an application under this section for fiscal year 
        2010 or 2011, the State shall no longer be eligible to submit 
        an application to receive funds from the amounts allotted for 
        the State for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014 and such 
        amounts shall be used by the Secretary to award grants under 
        this paragraph for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2014. The 
        Secretary also shall use any amounts from the allotments of 
        States that submit applications under this section for a fiscal 
        year that remain unexpended as of the end of the period in 
        which the allotments are available for expenditure under 
        paragraph (3) for awarding grants under this paragraph.
            ``(B) 3-year grants.--
                ``(i) In general.--The Secretary shall solicit 
            applications to award 3-year grants in each of fiscal years 
            2012, 2013, and 2014 to local organizations and entities to 
            conduct, consistent with subsection (b), programs and 
            activities in States that do not submit an application for 
            an allotment under this section for fiscal year 2010 or 
            2011.
                ``(ii) Faith-based organizations or consortia.--The 
            Secretary may solicit and award grants under this paragraph 
            to faith-based organizations or consortia.
            ``(C) Evaluation.--An organization or entity awarded a 
        grant under this paragraph shall agree to participate in a 
        rigorous Federal evaluation.
        ``(5) Maintenance of effort.--No payment shall be made to a 
    State from the allotment determined for the State under this 
    subsection or to a local organization or entity awarded a grant 
    under paragraph (4), if the expenditure of non-federal funds by the 
    State, organization, or entity for activities, programs, or 
    initiatives for which amounts from allotments and grants under this 
    subsection may be expended is less than the amount expended by the 
    State, organization, or entity for such programs or initiatives for 
    fiscal year 2009.
        ``(6) Data collection and reporting.--A State or local 
    organization or entity receiving funds under this section shall 
    cooperate with such requirements relating to the collection of data 
    and information and reporting on outcomes regarding the programs 
    and activities carried out with such funds, as the Secretary shall 
    specify.
    ``(b) Purpose.--
        ``(1) In general.--The purpose of an allotment under subsection 
    (a)(1) to a State is to enable the State (or, in the case of grants 
    made under subsection (a)(4)(B), to enable a local organization or 
    entity) to carry out personal responsibility education programs 
    consistent with this subsection.
        ``(2) Personal responsibility education programs.--
            ``(A) In general.--In this section, the term `personal 
        responsibility education program' means a program that is 
        designed to educate adolescents on--
                ``(i) both abstinence and contraception for the 
            prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted 
            infections, including HIV/AIDS, consistent with the 
            requirements of subparagraph (B); and
                ``(ii) at least 3 of the adulthood preparation subjects 
            described in subparagraph (C).
            ``(B) Requirements.--The requirements of this subparagraph 
        are the following:
                ``(i) The program replicates evidence-based effective 
            programs or substantially incorporates elements of 
            effective programs that have been proven on the basis of 
            rigorous scientific research to change behavior, which 
            means delaying sexual activity, increasing condom or 
            contraceptive use for sexually active youth, or reducing 
            pregnancy among youth.
                ``(ii) The program is medically-accurate and complete.
                ``(iii) The program includes activities to educate 
            youth who are sexually active regarding responsible sexual 
            behavior with respect to both abstinence and the use of 
            contraception.
                ``(iv) The program places substantial emphasis on both 
            abstinence and contraception for the prevention of 
            pregnancy among youth and sexually transmitted infections.
                ``(v) The program provides age-appropriate information 
            and activities.
                ``(vi) The information and activities carried out under 
            the program are provided in the cultural context that is 
            most appropriate for individuals in the particular 
            population group to which they are directed.
            ``(C) Adulthood preparation subjects.--The adulthood 
        preparation subjects described in this subparagraph are the 
        following:
                ``(i) Healthy relationships, such as positive self-
            esteem and relationship dynamics, friendships, dating, 
            romantic involvement, marriage, and family interactions.
                ``(ii) Adolescent development, such as the development 
            of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent growth and 
            development, body image, racial and ethnic diversity, and 
            other related subjects.
                ``(iii) Financial literacy.
                ``(iv) Parent-child communication.
                ``(v) Educational and career success, such as 
            developing skills for employment preparation, job seeking, 
            independent living, financial self-sufficiency, and 
            workplace productivity.
                ``(vi) Healthy life skills, such as goal-setting, 
            decision making, negotiation, communication and 
            interpersonal skills, and stress management.
    ``(c) Reservations of Funds.--
        ``(1) Grants to implement innovative strategies.--From the 
    amount appropriated under subsection (f) for the fiscal year, the 
    Secretary shall reserve $10,000,000 of such amount for purposes of 
    awarding grants to entities to implement innovative youth pregnancy 
    prevention strategies and target services to high-risk, vulnerable, 
    and culturally under-represented youth populations, including youth 
    in foster care, homeless youth, youth with HIV/AIDS, pregnant women 
    who are under 21 years of age and their partners, mothers who are 
    under 21 years of age and their partners, and youth residing in 
    areas with high birth rates for youth. An entity awarded a grant 
    under this paragraph shall agree to participate in a rigorous 
    Federal evaluation of the activities carried out with grant funds.
        ``(2) Other reservations.--From the amount appropriated under 
    subsection (f) for the fiscal year that remains after the 
    application of paragraph (1), the Secretary shall reserve the 
    following amounts:
            ``(A) Grants for indian tribes or tribal organizations.--
        The Secretary shall reserve 5 percent of such remainder for 
        purposes of awarding grants to Indian tribes and tribal 
        organizations in such manner, and subject to such requirements, 
        as the Secretary, in consultation with Indian tribes and tribal 
        organizations, determines appropriate.
            ``(B) Secretarial responsibilities.--
                ``(i) Reservation of funds.--The Secretary shall 
            reserve 10 percent of such remainder for expenditures by 
            the Secretary for the activities described in clauses (ii) 
            and (iii).
                ``(ii) Program support.--The Secretary shall provide, 
            directly or through a competitive grant process, research, 
            training and technical assistance, including dissemination 
            of research and information regarding effective and 
            promising practices, providing consultation and resources 
            on a broad array of teen pregnancy prevention strategies, 
            including abstinence and contraception, and developing 
            resources and materials to support the activities of 
            recipients of grants and other State, tribal, and community 
            organizations working to reduce teen pregnancy. In carrying 
            out such functions, the Secretary shall collaborate with a 
            variety of entities that have expertise in the prevention 
            of teen pregnancy, HIV and sexually transmitted infections, 
            healthy relationships, financial literacy, and other topics 
            addressed through the personal responsibility education 
            programs.
                ``(iii) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall evaluate the 
            programs and activities carried out with funds made 
            available through allotments or grants under this section.
    ``(d) Administration.--
        ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall administer this section 
    through the Assistant Secretary for the Administration for Children 
    and Families within the Department of Health and Human Services.
        ``(2) Application of other provisions of title.--
            ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), 
        the other provisions of this title shall not apply to 
        allotments or grants made under this section.
            ``(B) Exceptions.--The following provisions of this title 
        shall apply to allotments and grants made under this section to 
        the same extent and in the same manner as such provisions apply 
        to allotments made under section 502(c):
                ``(i) Section 504(b)(6) (relating to prohibition on 
            payments to excluded individuals and entities).
                ``(ii) Section 504(c) (relating to the use of funds for 
            the purchase of technical assistance).
                ``(iii) Section 504(d) (relating to a limitation on 
            administrative expenditures).
                ``(iv) Section 506 (relating to reports and audits), 
            but only to the extent determined by the Secretary to be 
            appropriate for grants made under this section.
                ``(v) Section 507 (relating to penalties for false 
            statements).
                ``(vi) Section 508 (relating to nondiscrimination).
    ``(e) Definitions.--In this section:
        ``(1) Age-appropriate.--The term `age-appropriate', with 
    respect to the information in pregnancy prevention, means topics, 
    messages, and teaching methods suitable to particular ages or age 
    groups of children and adolescents, based on developing cognitive, 
    emotional, and behavioral capacity typical for the age or age 
    group.
        ``(2) Medically accurate and complete.--The term `medically 
    accurate and complete' means verified or supported by the weight of 
    research conducted in compliance with accepted scientific methods 
    and--
            ``(A) published in peer-reviewed journals, where 
        applicable; or
            ``(B) comprising information that leading professional 
        organizations and agencies with relevant expertise in the field 
        recognize as accurate, objective, and complete.
        ``(3) Indian tribes; tribal organizations.--The terms `Indian 
    tribe' and `Tribal organization' have the meanings given such terms 
    in section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 U.S.C. 
    1603)).
        ``(4) Youth.--The term `youth' means an individual who has 
    attained age 10 but has not attained age 20.
    ``(f) Appropriation.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, 
there is appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, $75,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2014. 
Amounts appropriated under this subsection shall remain available until 
expended.''.

SEC. 2954. RESTORATION OF FUNDING FOR ABSTINENCE EDUCATION.

    Section 510 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 710) is amended--
        (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``fiscal year 1998 and each 
    subsequent fiscal year'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2010 
    through 2014''; and
        (2) in subsection (d)--
            (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``1998 through 
        2003'' and inserting ``2010 through 2014''; and
            (B) in the second sentence, by inserting ``(except that 
        such appropriation shall be made on the date of enactment of 
        the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in the case of 
        fiscal year 2010)'' before the period.

SEC. 2955. INCLUSION OF INFORMATION ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF HAVING A 
              HEALTH CARE POWER OF ATTORNEY IN TRANSITION PLANNING FOR 
              CHILDREN AGING OUT OF FOSTER CARE AND INDEPENDENT LIVING 
              PROGRAMS.

    (a) Transition Planning.--Section 475(5)(H) of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 675(5)(H)) is amended by inserting ``includes 
information about the importance of designating another individual to 
make health care treatment decisions on behalf of the child if the 
child becomes unable to participate in such decisions and the child 
does not have, or does not want, a relative who would otherwise be 
authorized under State law to make such decisions, and provides the 
child with the option to execute a health care power of attorney, 
health care proxy, or other similar document recognized under State 
law,'' after ``employment services,''.
    (b) Independent Living Education.--Section 477(b)(3) of such Act 
(42 U.S.C. 677(b)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
            ``(K) A certification by the chief executive officer of the 
        State that the State will ensure that an adolescent 
        participating in the program under this section are provided 
        with education about the importance of designating another 
        individual to make health care treatment decisions on behalf of 
        the adolescent if the adolescent becomes unable to participate 
        in such decisions and the adolescent does not have, or does not 
        want, a relative who would otherwise be authorized under State 
        law to make such decisions, whether a health care power of 
        attorney, health care proxy, or other similar document is 
        recognized under State law, and how to execute such a document 
        if the adolescent wants to do so.''.
    (c) Health Oversight and Coordination Plan.--Section 422(b)(15)(A) 
of such Act (42 U.S.C. 622(b)(15)(A)) is amended--
        (1) in clause (v), by striking ``and'' at the end; and
        (2) by adding at the end the following:
                ``(vii) steps to ensure that the components of the 
            transition plan development process required under section 
            475(5)(H) that relate to the health care needs of children 
            aging out of foster care, including the requirements to 
            include options for health insurance, information about a 
            health care power of attorney, health care proxy, or other 
            similar document recognized under State law, and to provide 
            the child with the option to execute such a document, are 
            met; and''.
    (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take 
effect on October 1, 2010.
